Dorian Schuyler Abbot is an American geophysicist. He is an associate professor at the University of Chicago. Abbot completed a A.B. (2004) in physics and a S.M. (2004) and Ph.D. (2008) in applied mathematics at the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. His dissertation was titled A high-latitude convective cloud feedback. Abbot's doctoral advisor was Eli Tziperman [Wikidata]. From 2008 to 2009, he was a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at Harvard University. Abbot conducted post doctoral research in geophysical sciences from 2009 to 2011 at the University of Chicago. Abbot became an assistant professor of geophysical sciences at University of Chicago in 2011. He became an associate professor in 2015. Abbot uses low-order mathematical models and numerical models to research climates, paleoclimates, planetary habitability, and exoplanets. Abbot was invited to give the 2020 John Carlson Lecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a public science outreach later rescheduled to October 2021, then cancelled in September of that year after complaints on Twitter about a Newsweek editorial co-written by Abbot and Stanford professor Ivan Marinovic. In the editorial Abbot and Marinovic argued for greater focus on academic excellence and individual achievement in University admissions, suggested scrapping legacy and athletic admission advantages, and criticized some aspects of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion initiatives. They recalled how the racial ideology of Nazi Germany "drove many of the best scholars out" of the universities, and called this "a warning of the consequences of viewing group membership as more important than merit". MIT explained the cancellation by stating that the public outreach lecture was meant to showcase a role model who inspires a broad group of young people, and they instead invited Abbot to give a standard departmental seminar at MIT. Abbot ultimately delivered his lecture on planetary science to a large audience hosted by the James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions at Princeton University on the same day as the cancelled event. Abbot was a guest on Tucker Carlson Tonight and CNN to discuss the cancellation and received a Hero of Intellectual Freedom Award from the American Council of Trustees and Alumni. Abbot's most cited publications are: