Gabriel Aeppli, PhD FRS (born 25 November 1956 in Zurich)  is a Swiss-American electrical engineer, co-founder of the London Centre for Nanotechnology and professor of physics at ETH Z端rich and EPF Lausanne, and head of the Synchrotron and Nanotechnology department of the Paul Scherrer Institute, also in Switzerland. He has contributed to spectroscopy on the magnetism of disordered systems and on high-temperature superconductors and antiferromagnetism identifying magnets with tuneable quantum fluctuations that can be used to study the transition between classical and quantum behavior. His work has helped to demonstrate that quantum spin fluctuations underlie exotic superconductivity. He has been recipient of multiple honors and he has more than 290 peer review publications, 14,054 total citations by 9,542 documents and h-index of 70. Son of mathematician Alfred Aeppli and Dorothee Aeppli, Gabriel was born in Z端rich 25 November 1956. Shortly after birth, Gabriel Aeppli moved from Z端rich, with his father, to the United States. He lived in London, United Kingdom from 2002 to 2015 when he moved back to Z端rich. He studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he in 1978 obtained a B.Sc. in mathematics. and PhD, M.Sc. & B.Sc, in electrical engineering (1983). He was a research assistant at MIT and industrial co-op student of IBM. From 1982 he was at the Bell Laboratories hired in 1993 as a distinguished member of the technical staff. From 1996 to 2002, he was a senior research scientist at the NEC Laboratories in Princeton. From 2002, as Quain Professor of Physics at University College London (UCL,) he helped to found the London Centre for Nanotechnology, where he acted as director until March 2015. His current technical focus is on the implications of photon science and nanotechnology for information processing and health care. He is a board member of Bio Nano Consulting. Currently, he is the director of Synchrotron Radiation and Nanotechnology at the Paul Scherrer Institute. In addition, he has been a member and chairman of many panels, sponsored by the USDOE, American Physical Society, EPSRC, and National Research Council (US), among others.