George Joseph (born 4 August 1938) is an Indian space scientist, best known for his contributions to the development of remote sensing technology in India, especially in the field of earth observation sensors. He is a former chairman of the Lunar Mission Study Task Force of the Indian Space Research Organization and an elected fellow of the National Academy of Sciences, India, Indian Academy of Sciences and Indian National Academy of Engineering. The Government of India awarded him the Padma Bhushan, the third highest civilian award, in 1999. George Joseph was born on 4 August 1938 to Advocate MG Joseph and Alice. After completing schooling, he joined St.Berchmans College, Changanassery and also studied at Alagappa Chettiar College in Karaikudi and University College, Trivandrum. He served as lecturer at Union Christian College, Aluva and at CMS College Kottayam. Afterwards he was a trainee at Bhabha Atomic Research Center (BARC), Bombay. Joseph is married to Mercy and they have two sons Joseph (Gibu) and Mathews (Reji). Joseph started his research career in 1962 at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, where he was involved in the study of cosmic rays. Based on his research work at the Tata Institute he was awarded a PhD degree by the Bombay University.  A novel detector system designed by him was flown on the first Indian satellite Aryabhata (satellite) to detect solar neutrons. In 1973, Joseph was invited to join the Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad-one of the centers of the Indian Space Research Organization, and initiated the development of remote sensing technology particularly sensors of various types. He has been the guiding force in the design and development of all the earth observation cameras on board Indian Remote Sensing Satellite and INSAT.  He served the Indian Space Research Organization in various capacities including director of its Space Applications Centre and took keen interest and initiative to ensure the fruits of space technology reach common man.  One of his contributions is the study report on Indian Mission to the Moon in the capacity as chairman of the Lunar Mission Study Task Force. Joseph has served in a number of national and international committees/organizations including president of Technical Commission – I of the International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing during 1996–2000 and director of the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (affiliated to the United Nations), with headquarters at Dehradun during 2006–2009.