Giulio Boccaletti, Ph.D., (born in Modena, Italy) is a British-Italian scientist and author. He is an Honorary Research Associate at the Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment. He has been the Chief Strategy Officer and Global Managing Director for Water at The Nature Conservancy and was a partner of consulting firm McKinsey & Company. Trained as a physicist and atmospheric scientist, Boccaletti has been a member of the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council, and has served on the OECD-WWC High Level Panel on Infrastructure Financing for a Water-Secure World. He is an Honorary Fellow of the Scientific Advisory Panel of the Euro-Mediterranean Center on Climate Change and a member of the editorial advisory board of the journal Water Security. An alumnus of MIT, Princeton and Bologna universities, Boccaletti was briefly a lead author of the fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and has contributed to the ideas platform published by the Edge Foundation, Inc. He was featured in the PBS series "H2O: The Molecule that Made Us". His book "Water: A Biography", a history of how the distribution of water has shaped human civilisation, is published by Pantheon Books. The Nature Conservancy Boccaletti joined The Nature Conservancy (TNC) in February 2013. In his role as Chief Strategy Officer, he worked with other members of the Executive Team to develop the organization's strategy and apply economic and scientific practice to its conservation agenda. Likewise, as the organization's Global Managing Director for Water, Boccaletti led a team of over 200 freshwater scientists, policy experts, economists and on-the-ground conservation practitioners, promoting action on water issues by governments and businesses. McKinsey In 2005 Boccaletti joined McKinsey & Company where he became a partner. He co-founded the water practice and worked with businesses and governments all over the world. He co-authored the “Charting Our Water Future” report, one of the first to address the question of global water scarcity through multilateral, private-public collaboration defining a cost-curve for investment in water infrastructure. MIT In September 2003 Boccaletti joined the Department of Earth Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he specialized in geophysical fluid dynamics and climate science. His research focused on the dynamics of large-scale oceanic flows. Boccaletti, G.; Ferrari, R.; Adcroft, A.; Ferreira, D.; Marshall, J. (2005). "The vertical structure of ocean heat transport". Geophysical Research Letters. MIT. 32 (10): L10603. Bibcode:2005GeoRL..3210603B. doi:10.1029/2005GL022474. Early academic career Boccaletti holds an MSc in Theoretical Physics from the Università di Bologna, Italy, and an MA and PhD in Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences from Princeton University. He also investigated the theory of the General Circulation of the Atmosphere at Italy's National Research Council (Italy). Boccaletti is an acknowledged expert of the Italian musical instrument known as the Ocarina, an ancient type of wind instrument, with a history dating back some 12,000 years. A member of the Gruppo Ocarinistico Budriese, Boccaletti has played professionally both in groups and solo since 1983.