Giuseppina Aliverti (1894 – 1982) was an Italian geophysicist specializing in several fields of terrestrial physics. She is remembered for developing the Aliverti-Lovera method of measuring the radioactivity of water. Born in Somma Lombardo (Varese), Italy on 4 December 1894, Giuseppina had at least one sister, Teresa Aliverti with whom she remained very close. Giuseppina Aliverti graduated with honors in physics in 1919 from the University of Turin. From 1932 to 1935, she was the professor in charge of geodesy and geophysics in Turin, and then from 1936 to 1951 she taught terrestrial physics as well. In 1937, the Italian Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry announced that Aliverti had the top scores in a geophysics competition and as winner she became the director of the Geophysical Observatory of Pavia, Italy while, at the same time, she taught terrestrial physics at the University of Pavia. Aliverti moved to Naples in 1949 to continue her teaching career at the Naval University Institute there (now called the Parthenope University) where she was chair of meteorology and oceanography. There, she went on to become dean of the faculty of nautical sciences from 1960 until 1970, when she retired. Aliverti died in Naples on 10 June 1982. Aliverti's official research began in 1920 with studies on the concentrations of electrolytic deposits. Expanding on her work on terrestrial physics, she started a line of experiments on electricity and the natural radioactivity of the atmosphere. In 1937, her work earned her the ten-year prize awarded by the Italian Society for the Progress of Sciences for Geophysical Studies. Working with physicist Giuseppe Lovera (1912–1990), and using a procedure that she developed with him (known as the Aliverti-Lovera method), she enabled researchers to calculate the radioactivity of water. According to Linguerri, her radioactivity research was significant. Later, collaborating again with Lovera, Aliverti made notable advances in marine aerosol research. Because she was a member of a subcommittee for oceanography of Italy's National Research Council (CNR), she developed the itinerary for five scientific cruises in the Tyrrhenian Sea that were carried out between 1958 and 1960. The data collected on those trips allowed researchers to calculate the average annual evaporation of this sea and was the starting point for future surveys of the Strait of Gibraltar (1961) and the Tyrrhenian Sea (1963). Even as she pursued her primary passion of physical oceanography, Aliverti continued until her last years to study atmospheric electricity and glaciology, in collaboration with researchers at the University of Turin at Col d'Olen in the Aosta Valley. Then she studied the mountains from a mathematical perspective working with the mathematical physicist Carlo Somigliana. She was particularly interested in the Lys glacier on Monte Rosa. According to the Archiepiscopal Seminary of Milan, it maintained its own terrestrial physics observatory, which included the Aliverti-Lovera cosmic ray tool for measuring cosmic radiation.  Aliverti authored numerous academic papers; the following have been cited by other authors most frequently.