Jerzy Stanisław Janicki (born 4 May 1956 in Piła, Poland), Ph.D. in physical sciences, member of the scientific and educational staff of the Physics Institute at Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań (1980–1993). Graduated from The Faculty of Mathematics and Physics at Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań in 1980 specialising in – Experimental Physics. Since 1980 he worked in the Physics Institute AMU at the position of assistant. In 1994 he defended his Ph.D. in nuclear physics . Since 1991 he has been the director of  The Institute for Physico-Medical Research, which he created under Primax Medic Research, Innovative and Development Company Ltd. The focus of the activities of the Institute is the development and implementation of new technologies in medicine. He is the author of numerous publications and scientific reports in nuclear physics, spectroscopy and magnetic properties of solids. The results of his research he has presented at many scientific conferences in Poland and abroad. He is the author of single fibre based heart activity model (SFHAM)   describing the electrical activity of myocardium used in  SATRO-ECG method    (protected by patent law P-372687) facilitating non-invasive cardiac diagnosis, including early detection of coronary heart disease. He also developed a unique distribution of inhomogeneous static magnetic field, which is used in magnetic products Energy For Life and MagneTouch. In 1991 he established and became the chairman of Primax Medic Research, Innovative and Development Company Ltd.  The company deals with implementation for commercial use the solutions developed in The Institute for Physico-Medical Research Development. With him as the leader the company achieved many successes: Running the company, he implements the policies of social responsibility of businesses. Moreover, he also participates in the initiative of the UN Secretary General under the name United Nations Global Compact . In his activities he supports scientific and cultural events, e.g.: he physics contest organised by Polish Physical Society, film festival “Integration You and Me”  in Koszalin, Chopin Festival  in Small Philharmonic Hall in Puszczykowo. In 2004 he received the title of Doctor Honoris Causa at the Department of Medical Science of the Open International University in Colombo , implementing the objectives of World Health Organization (WHO) under the program "Health for All". He was nominated to stand for the prestigious Kavli Prize for the year 2010 in Neuroscience (Reference No.: 9444828 ). He is the second Pole in the history of International Association of Educators for World Peace  nominated by this organization to the Nobel Peace Prize in 2010  . Jerzy Stanisław Janicki in the portal nauka-polska.pl