Julieta Norma Fierro Gossman (Mexico City, February 24, 1948) best known as Julieta Fierro is a Mexican astrophysicist and science communicator. She is a full researcher at the Institute of Astronomy and professor of the Sciences Faculty at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM). She is part of the Researchers National System in Mexico, holding a level III position. Since 2004 she is a member of the Mexican Academy of Language.   Her research is focused on the study of interstellar medium and her latest research involves the study of the solar system. Nonetheless, she is most known for her science communication work. She holds three honris causa doctorates, and several laboratories, libraries, planetariums, astronomical societies, and schools have her name.   Julieta Fierro was born on February 24, 1948, in Mexico City. She studied physics at the UNAM School of Sciences and obtained her degree in 1974. Afterwards she earned a masters in Astrophysics at the same institution. She is a  researcher in the Institute of Astronomy at UNAM and a full professor at the  School of Sciences of the same university.    From March 2000 to January 2004, she was UNAM's General Director of Scientific Outreach. She has been in positions such as vice president and president of the Education Commission of the International Astronomical Union and president of the Mexican Academy of Natural Sciences Teachers and of the Mexican Association of Science and Technology Museums. Furthermore, she belonged to the board of directors of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, which is focused on communicating science to improve education.    She was elected a member of the Academia Mexicana de la Lengua on July 24, 2003, and took possession of its 25th chair on August 26, 2004, with the lecture entitled Imaginemos un Caracol (Let's Imagine a Snail). She was elected a corresponding member of the Royal Spanish Academy on April 21, 2005.    Throughout her career, she has written 40 books, of which 23 are on popular science. She has published dozens of articles in national and international journals. One of her writings was published in Mayan (an indigenous language). With the purpose of communicating science to broader audiences, she has given hundreds of talks and lectures, and designed multiple workshops of science for kids. During 2020 she published a series of scientific activities to perform at home during the lockdown periods due to the COVID-19 pandemic.   She participated in the creation of the astronomy room at  Universum, one of the most popular University museums in Latin America. She was the director of Universum and of the Museo Descubre of Aguascalientes. She collaborated on the creation of a science museum in Puerto Rico and the McDonald Observatory in the United States and the Sutherland in South Africa. She collaborates actively with Universum, the Museum of Natural Sciences, the Museo de la Luz (Museum of the Light), the McDonald Observatory in Texas and Puerto Rico, and with the Global Fair in Japan.   She has participated in thousands of radio shows where she reads about science and talks about her passion for it. Sometimes she invites other scientists and interview them to enrich the conversation. She hosted a television series titled: Más allá de las estrellas (Beyond the Stars), which was chosen as the best science show in Mexico in 1998. Her most recent collabration with mexican TV was with Canal 11, a channel from the Instituto Politécnico Nacional with the TV show called Sofía Luna, agente espacial (Special Agent, Sofia Luna).    From the collection Ciencia para todos (science for everyone) from the Fondo de Cultura Económica in México, her main works are: Throughout her career she has been awarded with multiple prizes and her work recognized by different institutons:   