Leonid Isakovich Manevitch (Russian: Леонид Исакович Маневич; April 2, 1938 – August 20, 2020) was a Soviet and Russian physicist, mechanical engineer, and mathematician. He made fundamental contributions to areas of nonlinear dynamics, composite and polymer physics, and asymptotology. Manevitch was born on April 2, 1938, in Mogilev (USSR, now Belarus). He received his M.S. with great distinction in mechanics (1959) and his Candidate of Sciences (PhD, 1961) and Doctor of Sciences (1970) from Dnipro National University.  From 1959 to 1964, Manevitch worked on missile design as an aerospace engineer and head of the Stress Analysis Team under Mikhail Yangel at the Yuzhnoye Design Office. In 1964, he became an Associate Professor at Dnipro National University. His doctoral thesis was devoted to asymptotic and group-theory methods in the mechanics of deformable solids. He was promoted in 1973 to Full Professor in the Department of Applied Theory of Elasticity.   After moving to Moscow in 1976, he worked as a senior research fellow and later as head of the Division of Polymer Physics and Mechanics at the Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics of the Russian Academy of Sciences. In 1984, he was appointed a Professor of polymer physics and mechanics at the Department of Molecular and Chemical Physics of the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology. Several of his works are devoted to the connections between physics and mathematics, and in particular, asymptotology. Manevitch made significant contributions to the theory of nonlinear normal oscillations in essentially nonlinear systems, to nonstationary dynamics of nonlinear oscillatory systems; to molecular dynamics and physics of polymers and composite materials. His research has numerous applications in various fields of mechanical science and engineering, polymer physics, and nanotechnology. Under his leadership, the Division of Polymer Physics and Mechanics became one of the world's leading research teams in its field. His team actively collaborated with leading research centers in the USA, Italy, France, Israel, and Germany. A detailed review of the scientific activities of Prof. L.I. Manevitch can be found in L.I. Manevitch was an active participant at many Russian and international symposia, conferences and congresses. As a guest speaker he repeatedly appeared at seminars of famous universities in the USA, European countries and Israel. His scientific results are presented in 20 monographs and in more than 400 publications.