Tomasz Wójcik (born 6 June 1963 in Warsaw) is a Polish graphic designer, stage designer, theater director and doctor of physical sciences. Creates posters for plays, films, festivals and cultural events and promoting public awareness campaigns. Tomasz Wójcik was born as son of the cinematographer, professor of the National Film School in Łódź, Jerzy Wójcik and the film and theater actress Magda Teresa Wójcik. He studied physics on the Warsaw University of Technology and received his doctorate under professor Jan Petykiewicz in 1996. His posters were exhibited at numerous exhibitions including International Poster Biennial in Wilanów, Lahti Poster Biennial, International Biennial of the Poster in Mexico City, Trnava Poster Triennial. Poster for the Polish film The complaint (Skarga) was named the best poster on Human Rights Watch International Film Festival in Strasbourg, France (1992) Since 1986, Tomasz Wójcik designs stage sets and theatrical costumes. He is the author of 50 projects, both for performances of classical works, such as Antigone by Sophocles, Bhagavad Gita based on the Mahabharata, Richard III by William Shakespeare, as well as modern texts, such as: The Process by Franz Kafka, The Plague by Albert Camus, The Emperor by Ryszard Kapuściński. In 1991 he made his debut as a theater director carrying out spectacle of Die Panne by Friedrich Dürrenmatt (Teatr Adekwatny, Warsaw). He also directed the original spectacle Glare (1993, Teatr Adekwatny, Warsaw) and Macbeth by William Shakespeare (2003, Teatr Na Woli, Warsaw). Tomasz Wójcik is member of the authorities of the Teatr Adekwatny Association and was the artistic director of their projects: Festival of Contemporary Art – Four Elements, cycles of concerts and performances Lenten Triptych, cycles of screenings and meetings with the filmmakers Animagic. He was the artistic manager of the Warsaw artistic club Lokal Użytkowy. He is the author of several graphic projects implemented in Poland and abroad, such as: visual identification of international cooperation project of art universities Inter-artes, projects of books and magazines, among others. Labyrinth of Light (Labirynt światła) by Jerzy Wójcik (2006), Hero's expedition (Wyprawa bohatera) by Seweryn Kuśmierczyk (2014). He designed also record covers, among others: Air by Jerzy Malek (2011), Komeda-Chopin-Komeda by Lena Ledoff (2011), As sung by Billie Holiday by Ida Zalewska (2012), Tomasz Wójcik has also designed the exhibition to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Warsaw School of Economics in Chicago and the exhibition Reconstitution of the Memory of Poland in the European Parliament in Brussels. He cooperated with the TV channel Kino Polska and created a brand image of digitization project of Polish cinema masterpieces Kino RP. Wójcik collaborates with the Copernicus Science Centre in Warsaw, and Warsaw University of Technology contributing to educational projects.