Adil Asadov - (Azerbaijani: Adil İsgəndər oğlu Əsədov) is an Azerbaijani philosopher, currently head of the department at Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences and President of Association of Philosophical Enlightenment. Adil Asadov was born on October 1, 1958, in Guba, Azerbaijan SSR, USSR. In 1975 he finished Guba boarding school and in 1980 graduated from Azerbaijan University of Architecture and Construction. In 1986 he was admitted to the Aspirantura (postgraduate school) in Philosophy at the Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Philosophy and Law. He defended his PhD (Kandidat nauk) thesis titled “Historical types of thinking and engineering activity” in 1989. After completing his postdoctoral research he successfully defended a thesis titled The dynamics of the types of thinking in the context of the system "society and nature"” in 1994. In 2005 he founded the Association of Philosophical Enlightenment.Currently, he is head of the department at the Institute of Philosophy, the Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, President of the Association of Philosophical Enlightenment. Adil Asadov is the author of more than 170 scientific articles in Azerbaijani, Russian, English and German languages. He has been a participant and lecturer at many international conferences.He gave a speech at international conferences in Baku, Moscow, Minsk, Tbilisi, Belgorod, Bratislava, Athens, St. Petersburg and Harvard University. He represented the Republic of Azerbaijan at the Second European Social Science Conference (June 13–18, 1998). His speech was published in 1999 in Paris. After the dissolution  of the USSR Adil Asadov is the first Azerbaijani author published in the "Вопросы философии" that is the most influential philosophical journal of post-soviet states. He has translated large-scale works from the world philosophical heritage:  the masterpiece by Arthur Schopenhauer “The World as Will and Representation” and "History of Philosophy" by Gunnar Skirbekk and Nils Gilje. The main direction of his scientific activity is creation of the Philosophical Pentalogy – a philosophical system that is composed of five parts: Philosophy Beauty, Philosophy of Being, Philosophy of Thinking, Moral Philosophy and, Philosophy of Politics.