Adrian Parr (born 1967) is an Australian-born philosopher and cultural critic. She specializes in environmental philosophy and activism. In addition, she published on the sustainability movement, climate change politics, activist culture, and creative practice. Parr was born in Sydney Australia. Her father, Mike Parr, and her aunt, Julie Rrap, are contemporary Australian artists who introduced Parr to the world of activist culture at an early age. She completed her bachelor's degree with First Class Honors in Philosophy at Deakin University in 1998, followed by a Master's in Philosophy in 2000. She began her PhD studies under the direction of the feminist philosopher Claire Colebrook. Parr's PhD dissertation "Creative Production: From Da Vinci to Deleuze" was revised and published by Edwin Mellen Press in 2003. Between 2003 and 2006 she was a professor of cultural criticism at Savannah College of Art and Design. Whilst in Savannah, Parr co-founded (with Avantika Bawa and Celina Jeffery) Drain: A Journal of Contemporary Art and Culture. In 2006 she moved to the University of Cincinnati. Parr was a tenured Full Professor with a joint appointment in the Department of Political Science and the School of Architecture and the Interior Design at the University of Cincinnati. In 2011 she was awarded the Rieveschl Award for Scholarly and Creative Work. This distinguished award recognizes a University of Cincinnati faculty for professional achievement in creative and scholarly work.  In 2013, she was appointed Director of The Charles Phelps Taft Research Center and Chair of Taft Faculty. In 2013, Parr was one of the speakers at the "March Against Monsanto" rally held in Cincinnati, Ohio. The Cincinnati rally was part of a national movement of protests that called attention to the dangers of using genetically modified food. The protest spotlighted the companies that use genetically modified food. In 2013 Parr was appointed as UNESCO water chair. In July 2017, she was one of the founding signatories for the Geneva Actions on Human Water Security.  In March 2018, Parr was appointed Dean of the College of Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs (CAPPA) at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA). In November 2020, Parr was named incoming Dean of the College of Design at the University of Oregon. In November 2013, Adrian Parr and Michael Zaretsky co-directed the Future Cities; Livable Futures symposium, a public event that provided a platform for attendees to share and discuss the future of urban life. Future Cities; Livable Futures featured an interdisciplinary panel of speakers focused on topics such as sustainable urban development, increasing population, inadequate infrastructure, poor social services, escalating health problems, and challenges posed by climate change.  Both Parr and Zaretsky were interviewed on public radio about sustainable urban development and their notion of livable cities.  Parr was interviewed by public radio for her views on environmental racism.  Then again on CBS where she described Hurricane Harvey as more of a man-made disaster than a natural disaster. In 2014 Parr founded Louder Than A Bomb Cincy. She worked with local organizations, University of Cincinnati affiliations, spoken-word poets, and Cincinnati public school district teachers to bring what is the largest youth poetry slam in the nation, to Cincinnati. According to an article in the News Record, "LTAB was originally founded in Chicago in 2001 through nonprofit Young Chicago Authors as a festival for young spoken word artists of diverse cultural backgrounds to gather and engage in performances of their poetry."She has been interviewed on national public radio and television for her work directing the Louder Than A Bomb Cincy program.  Her interviews have included 2016 interview with NPR, a 2015 interview with WVXU Chanel 5, and an earlier 2015 NPR interview with Bill Reinhardt. In addition to community outreach, Parr has spoken on and been interviewed for her views on climate change, environmental degradation, and sustainable development. In her capacity as a UNESCO water chair, she is strong advocate for water justice. In a NPR interview for World Water Day Parr speaks of the ongoing struggle for clean, accessible, and affordable water the world over. Again on public radio she speaks of the connection between environmental racism and the struggles of Native American communities to survive the rising seas and the contamination of their water supplies. Later, in a television interview with the Newsmakers, Parr describes Hurricane Harvey as more of a man-made than a natural disaster. In an interview for The New York Times with journalist Natasha Lennard, Parr discusses how environmental damage and climate change are not only forms violence but a crime against humanity. In his op-ed in The New York Times Brad Evans, the founder/director of the Histories of Violence Project expanded upon Parr's framework of climate violence explaining that environmental degradation is a crime against humanity.  Evans writes, Parr "also posed the question of what a crime against humanity actually means in such a context. It turns out, there are many ways in which damage to the environment rises to that level. This type of violence presents profound existential questions about what it means to be human and the ontological crimes (i.e., a crime against the human as such) some of us wage against ourselves." In 2016, Parr produced, wrote, and narrated her first documentary, The Intimate Realities of Water.   Parr co-directed the film with Sean Hughes.  In addition, Sean Hughes was the editor and Jon Hughes, his father was the director of photography. When the documentary was released in 2016, it was screened it was screened at numerous independent film festivals in the United States where it went on to win 13 awards. The film follows the lives of four women living in the slums of Nairobi, documenting the water and sanitation challenges they face. National public radio featured an interview with Parr and the film team where they discussed the making of the film. From 2014-2017 Parr produced and directed the TAFTtalks and H2Otalks series.  TAFTtalks concentrate on drawing out issues of interest beyond the academy and focus on big, contemporary ideas, and concerns.  Among those she has interviewed for TAFTtalks include Tara Houska and Rosi Braidotti.  Houska is a staunch activist of Native American rights.  She is an Ojibwe of Saulteaux, Couchiching First Nation and is the founding board member of Not Your Mascots. Houska was also the Native American adviser for Bernie Sanders, during his presidential campaign, and Houska is the National Campaigns Director for Honor the Earth.  Braidotti is a Distinguished University Professor and the director of the Centre for the Humanities at Utrecht University in the Netherlands. The H2Otalks were featured as a part of the 50th anniversary of the UNESCO Water Programmes during the 38th UNESCO General Conference, as part of the "50 Years, 50 Movies on Water," in November 2015.  Those she has interviewed include prominent environmentalist Bill McKibben. Parr has published numerous books on environmental politics, the built environment, and cultural production. Parr is a regular contributor to the LA Review of Books series on violence.  She has interviewed Serbian performance artist, Marina Abramović, spoken word artist Malcolm London, and sound artist David Rothenberg.  She has written on environmental politics and climate change for a number of publications including Equitable Action on Climate Now (October 2013) for the World Financial Review and Selective Amnesia (February 2015) for the European Magazine. "Environmental degradation is calling us to the witness stand of history. It demands we testify against ourselves and mount a case in our defense. Ultimately, we are all agents of history. To reduce ourselves to a role of mere observation is to deny us of our humanity." – Adrian Parr, The New York Times, May 2016