Barbara Herman (born May 9, 1945) is the Griffin Professor of Philosophy and Professor of Law at the University of California, Los Angeles Department of Philosophy. A well-known interpreter of Kant's ethics, Herman works on moral philosophy, the history of ethics, and social and political philosophy. Among her many honors and awards include a Guggenheim Fellowship (1985-1986) and election to the American Academy of Arts & Sciences (1995). Herman was born in New York City to Ruth and Robert Herman. Her mother was a secretary and father a union organizer and professional fund-raiser. Her brother is physicist Jay Herman. Herman attended Flushing High School in Queens until 1962, after which she studied history at Cornell University. While a senior at Cornell, Herman was "the first woman to live at Telluride House under the new arrangements" after "Convention for the first time was able to grant full residential preferment to an undergraduate woman." There she lived alongside fellow house members Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Clare Selgin Wolfowitz, and Paul Wolfowitz, as well as in-house faculty members that included the 4th United States Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins and the British philosopher Paul Grice. She has since taught Telluride Association Summer Program (TASP) seminars at Deep Springs College and the Cornell branch. Shortly after graduating from Cornell with a B.A. in 1966, Herman began doctoral studies in the history program at Harvard University. Soon, however, she discovered her affinity for philosophy and transferred to the Philosophy Department, but not before taking an M.A. in Modern European History. Studying under Stanley Cavell and John Rawls, Herman wrote a dissertation entitled "Morality as Rationality: A Study of Kant's Ethics" in 1976. Of Herman's time at Harvard, Martha Nussbaum said during her introduction to the Dewey Lecture at the University of Chicago Law School: From 1973-1980 Herman was assistant professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, before joining the faculty at the University of Southern California, first as a Visiting Assistant Professor and subsequently as an Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, and finally Professor of Philosophy and Law in 1992. In 1994 Herman was appointed Griffin Professor of Philosophy at UCLA and in 2006 was jointly appointed to the law school. In a review of The Practice of Moral Judgment, Kant scholar Paul Guyer writes of Herman's work: And on her collection of essays entitled Moral Literacy, philosopher Stephen Darwall writes: To which legal theorist Lawrence Solum adds on his blog: In 2014 Herman delivered the Dewey Lectureship in Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago Law School entitled "The Moral Side of Non-Negligence." Books Articles