Do-ol is the pen name of the contemporary South Korean philosopher Kim Yong-ok (sometimes given as To-ol Kim Young-oak). Dr. Kim Yong-ok (literally "Gold Dragon Jade"), best known by his pen-name “Do-ol” (stone-head, a Daoist/Zen reference) is Korea's leading "public philosopher." He was born June 14, 1948 in Cheonan. Once a leading professor of the Oriental Classics at Korea University, Kim became a Doctor of Oriental Medicine, a playwright and movie-director, and is now professor emeritus of Chung-ang University. He is an expert on Oriental doctrines and medicines, and a polyglot. He has been putting out several successful series of books and lectures on KBS TV covering his relevant modern interpretations of classical Daoism (Lao-tzu), the Analects of Confucius and Zen Buddhism (the Diamond Sutra). Kim graduated from Korea University with a bachelor's degree in philosophy. He received master's degrees at both the National Taiwan University and the University of Tokyo. He received his Ph.D. from Harvard University, his paper being about Wang Fuzhi. He also received a Doctor of Oriental Medicine from Wonkwang University. Kim's theory of philosophy, however, is not fully accepted by either Korean or Western philosophical circles. The philosophy of Ki (Qi, in Chinese) claims the unique revival and reinterpretation of Eastern traditional philosophy to overcome the intrinsic limitations of Western philosophical traditions. Throughout his books, Kim claims that his unique formulation of the philosophy of Ki is revolutionary in mankind's intellectual history. He has published this idea quite often throughout his numerous works, but the philosophy itself seems to undergo the process of development.[citation needed] In June 2019, Kim was sued for defamation by the family of former president Syngman Rhee for his speeches in his talk show Do-ol Ah-in Going All Directions, where he allegedly called Rhee a puppet of the United States and the Soviet Union who was responsible for the Division of Korea and the mass murder of Jeju people in Jeju Uprising incident. Kim has one daughter, Miru Kim, who works as an artist, photographer, and arts events coordinator.