Edouard Machery is a French-American philosopher and distinguished professor in the Department of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of Pittsburgh. Machery earned his Ph.D. from the Université de Paris-Sorbonne in 2004. His research focuses on philosophy, experimental philosophy, and cognitive science, with a particular emphasis on concepts, external validity, statistics, and human cognition. His work covers various topics such as categorization, concept learning, and experimental philosophy. Machery has published books including "Doing without concepts" and "Philosophy within its proper bounds." He has received several awards, including the Chancellor's Distinguished Research Award from the University of Pittsburgh and the Stanton Prize from the Society for Philosophy and Psychology. In 2022, he was elected President of the Society for Philosophy and Psychology for the term 2023-2024. Edouard Machery received a Ph.D. in philosophy at the Université de Paris-Sorbonne in 2004. The research works of Edouard Machery are in philosophy, experimental philosophy, and cognitive science especially about concepts. According to his theory, the notion of concept is ill-suited for a scientific psychology. Therefore, he criticizes the neo-empiricist accounts of concepts. He has also worked on the experimental psychology, with a special focus on external validity and statistics. He has also worked on the theories of human cognition. His works are on various topics, including the processes as categorization and concept learning. The experimental philosophy is another topic on which he has worked. He has used experimental and quasi-experimental methods in order to determine the characteristics of intuition and folk judgments about intentional action. The works of Edouard Machery have been reviewed by other cognitive scientists. Edouard Machery was awarded the Chancellor's Distinguished Research Award by the Pittsburgh University in 2011. He was also awarded the Stanton Prize by the Society for Philosophy and Psychology in 2013. In 2022, he was elected President of the Society for Philosophy and Psychology for 2023-2024.