Etienne Vermeersch (2 May 1934, Sint-Michiels, Bruges – 18 January 2019, Ghent) was a Belgian moral philosopher, skeptic, opinion maker and debater. He is one of the founding fathers of the abortion, euthanasia law, and the Law on Patients' Rights in Belgium. Vermeersch became an atheist after five years with the Society of Jesus (Jesuits). Later he became a philosophical materialist. In January 2008, Vermeersch was chosen by hundred prominent Flemings as the most influential intellectual of Flanders. He died in a hospital in Ghent on 18 January 2019 by euthanasia after a long illness. Etienne Vermeersch had an MA in classical philology and in philosophy. In 1965 he obtained his PhD on the philosophical implications of information theory and cybernetics at Ghent University, Belgium. He became a professor at Ghent University in 1967. For decades he taught Philosophy of science, History of philosophy, 20th-century philosophy, Philosophical anthropology and History of christianity. He worked on the foundations of the social sciences, on the philosophical aspects of research into informatics, on Artificial Intelligence, and on general social and ethical problems, mainly with regard to Bioethics, Environmental philosophy, and Cultural philosophy. He was a Vice-Rector at Ghent University from 1993 until 1997. He was, among others, a member of the Flemish Board for Scientific Policy, of the governmental board of the Flemish Institute for Biotechnology, member of the Environmental Board of Flanders, and member of the Federal Board for Science Policy. He was also President of the Advisory Committee of Bioethics. The Medical Assisted Reproduction Act, the Scientific Research Act, even the Transgender Act would not be what they are today in Belgium without Vermeersch's input. The legalization of therapeutic cloning, which sparked heated debate in the Senate, overcame it thanks to its ethical considerations. Etienne Vermeersch published: Professor Vermeersch was also a major Belgian skeptic. He was a founding member of SKEPP ('Research Society for Critical Evaluation of Pseudoscience and the Paranormal'). He lectured and published on this topic for more than 40 years. In the 1990s there was some commotion in the Belgian media when Vermeersch wrote an article on rational and ethical grounds entitled Why the Christian God cannot exist. Vermeersch considered the overpopulation of the earth as the most profound problem in the world and related it to the problem of overconsumption. He supported the human birth control of Taiwan since 1967 and later Thailand. In the beginning of January 2005 he survived a second heart attack. He remained active as a prominent intellectual in Belgium and the Netherlands. When he died he was widely seen as one of Belgium's most influential philosophers.