Jeanette Marie Boxill (née Bozanic) is an American academic who was Senior Lecturer in Philosophy (ethics) at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. She was also Chair of the Faculty and Director of Parr Center for Ethics. Her writing and teaching relate broadly with ethical issues in social conduct, social and political philosophy, feminist theory, and ethics in sports. She is editor of Sports Ethics: An Anthology and Issues in Race and Gender. She is past president of the International Association for Philosophy in Sport, serves on the board of the NCAA Scholarly Colloquium Committee, and chairs both the 2011 NCAA Scholarly Colloquium and the Education Outreach Program for the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency (USADA). For 25 years, Boxill was the public address announcer for UNC women's basketball and field hockey. She is a member of numerous professional associations (philosophy, sports, and the American Association of University Women) and has won a number of awards (from inside her institution and beyond) for teaching and professional contributions. She resigned from UNC in 2015 in the wake of the UNC Chapel Hill academics-athletics scandal. Jan Boxill was born Jeanette Marie Bozanic circa 1939 in Worcester, New York. Her father John was an immigrant from Yugoslavia, and her mother Martha was an immigrant from Czechoslovakia. After graduating from Worcester Central School in 1956, Bozanic joined the United States Air Force and played saxophone in the Women's Air Force Band. She then enrolled at the University of California, Los Angeles using the G.I. Bill and played club basketball while completing her Bachelor of Arts degree in political science. After completing her B.A. in 1967, she earned an M.A. in philosophy in 1975 followed by a Ph.D. in philosophy in 1981, both also at UCLA. Her writing and teaching relate broadly with ethical issues in social conduct, social and political philosophy, feminist theory, and ethics in sports. She is editor of Sports Ethics: An Anthology and Issues in Race and Gender. She is past president of the International Association for Philosophy in Sport, serves on the board of the NCAA Scholarly Colloquium Committee, and chairs both the 2011 NCAA Scholarly Colloquium and the Education Outreach Program for the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency (USADA). For 25 years, Boxill was the public address announcer for UNC women's basketball and field hockey. At UNC, she was Senior Lecturer in Philosophy (ethics) and also Chair of the Faculty and Director of Parr Center for Ethics. She is a member of numerous professional associations (philosophy, sports, and the American Association of University Women) and has won a number of awards (from inside her institution and beyond) for teaching and professional contributions.  She resigned from UNC in 2015 in the wake of the UNC Chapel Hill academics-athletics scandal. From 1991 to 2011, Boxill was an academic advisor for the North Carolina Tar Heels women's basketball team at UNC Chapel Hill. Boxill resigned from her employment at UNC in February 2015, after it was alleged that she had steered athletes toward 'scam courses' in order to qualify for the school's sports teams. Boxill, who had been the faculty chair, a senior lecturer in ethics, and an academic counselor for athletes had been told on October 22, 2014, that her employment with the university would be terminated, but she had been appealing that institutional decision. Then, she announced her resignation on February 28, 2015. Systematic investigation of the 20-year-long 'incident' was published in The Wainstein Report The NCAA initially accused her of giving impermissible academic assistance and special arrangements to women’s basketball players. Three months later, after reviewing the record and hearing her explanations at a hearing, the NCAA cleared her. While at UCLA, she married Bernard R. Boxill, who also teaches philosophy as the Pardue Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at UNC and focuses upon social and political philosophy and African American philosophy.