Jesús Padilla Gálvez (xe'sus pa'ðiʎa 'ɣalβeθ) (born October 28, 1959) is a philosopher who worked primarily in philosophy of language, logic, and the history of sciences. Jesús Padilla Gálvez studied Philosophy, History and Mathematics at the University of Cologne (Germany) and was awarded the M.A. in 1983 and a Dr. phil. in Philosophy in 1988. He was Research Assistant (1988–1991) at the University of Murcia (Spain) and later held the post of Associate Professor (1992–1994) for Logic and Philosophy of Language at the University of León (Spain). From 1994 to 1999 he was Visiting Professor at the Johannes Kepler University in Linz (Austria). Since 1999 he has been Professor at the University of Castilla-La Mancha in Toledo (Spain). He has held visiting posts at the Universities of University of Erlangen-Nuremberg (Germany), University of Graz (Austria), University of Potsdam (Germany), University of Cambridge (United Kingdom), University of Munich (Germany), University of Vienna and the University of Oxford (United Kingdom). As director of the international scientific journal Dókos. Revista Filosófica - Philosophical Review (published in Ápeiron Ediciones (Madrid) and editor of the international series "Aporia / Aπορία" (De Gruyter) the author is continuously engaged with highly relevant philosophical topics. In his doctoral thesis, Padilla Gálvez examined central issues of analytic philosophy. His subsequent investigations are characterized by an application of the analytic method to the study of philosophical problems.  This method involves both, the analysis of language to eliminate ambiguity as well as a profound scrutiny of the logical form of philosophical propositions. Padilla Galvez's work may be classified into five lines of investigation: philosophy of language, logic, philosophy of history of science, social changes in democratic systems and language for specific purposes (LSP). He was dealing with the works of Gottfried Leibniz, Immanuel Kant, Edmund Husserl, Alfred Tarski, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Willard Van Orman Quine, Saul Kripke, among others. Padilla Gálvez is recognized as one of the leading experts of Ludwig Wittgenstein's philosophy in the English and Spanish-speaking world.As the co-author of the "Wittgenstein Studien" he has published extensively in the field by focusing on logic-grammatical analysis of language. This includes such topics as history of logic and mathematics (Kurt Gödel), Action, Decision-Making and Forms of Life), Anthropology, language, aesthetics, politics (democracy and terrorism) and practical philosophy. He is the author of and of numerous articles in Diálogos, Grazer Philosophische Studien, Journal for General Philosophy of Science, Logos, Mathesis, Modern Logic, Philosophia Naturalis, Philosophisches Jahrbuch, Wittgenstein-Studien, Zeitschrift für Philosophische Forschung and other journals and collections.