Lady Mary Shepherd, née Primrose (31 December 1777 – 7 January 1847) was a Scottish philosopher who published two philosophical books, one in 1824 and one in 1827. According to Robert Blakey, in her entry in his History of the Philosophy of the Mind, she exercised considerable influence over the Edinburgh philosophy of her day. Lady Mary Primrose was the second daughter of Neil Primrose, 3rd Earl of Rosebery. She was born at Barnbougle Castle on the family estate near Dalmeny, Midlothian. Shepherd had four other siblings. Her older bother Archibald Primrose, had a successful life and eventually became a Member of Parliament and 4th Earl of Rosebery.  She grew up in a family of wealth and money was never an issue, which during that time period, was rarely a problem for aristocratic Scottish families. While her brothers went to school, she instead was taught at home by a tutor. Her tutor, Mr. Pillans, actually offered a much more difficult education, that he was also able to personalize and create a structure just for Shepherd. In her daughters memoir, it states how thankful Mary was for Mr. Pillans and how much of an influence he had on her during the early part of her childhood. The help and education she received from Mr. Pillans actually persuaded her into finding an interest in Philosophy. It is later confirmed that Mr. Pillans took time to go over subjects like history, mathematics, geography, and even Latin. She was never forced to follow a subject that she did not enjoy, which allowed her to develop a passion on her own.  She lived with her family for most of her life until she married an English barrister, Henry John Shepherd, in 1808 at the age of 30. She was older than expected for a women to be getting married, but did not settle for a man older than her as Henry was only 25 at the time of marriage. Henry did not have the same burning passion for philosophy that Mary had but was rather interested in drama. That did not get in the way of their marriage as Mary actually enjoyed the freedom she had compared to other women in that time period. Some people found their marriage to be weird due to Mary putting her career first and Henry not having an issue with it. The Shepherds had a total of three children, two daughters and one son. Their first child, Mary Elizabeth Shepherd was born the same year Mary and Henry got married, 1808. Next came their son Henry Primrose Shepherd in 1814, and finally their second daughter, Maria Charlotte Shepherd in 1815. Out of all their children, Mary Elizabeth had the most success in her life as she was actually the one who wrote the memoir explaining her mothers life. Sadly, their other children did not follow their older siblings due to health issues. Maria Charlotte only lived to the age of 15 and Henry John dealt with health issues from a young age. Although Shepherd's philosophical books only appeared in the 1820s, a memoir by her daughter indicates that their composition in fact predated her marriage. In the first, an essay on the relation between cause and effect, she criticised the views of David Hume, Thomas Brown and the physiologist William Lawrence. In her second book of essays, on the perception of an external universe, she argued against both the idealism of George Berkeley and Thomas Reid's epistemological reliance on natural instinct. Shepherd's correspondence shows a continuing interest in philosophical questions. A private philosophical controversy with the amateur philosopher John Fearn over the relation between perception and physical extension was published in Parriana (1828). After learning of its publication, Shepherd wrote in defence of her position in Fraser's. Charlotte Nooth dedicated her 1816 novel, Eglantine, to Shepherd. Mary Shepherd passed away at the age of 69 in 1847, but not before leaving an everlasting legacy in the world of philosophy. She was known for her research, writings, and her influence on others within her social groups. Shepherd was known to have a small, close-knitted group of intellectuals that she shared constant ideas with. She influenced her friends like Charles Babbage with mathematics, David Ricardo with economics, and even Samuel Taylor Coleridge with his poetry. She played such an influential role on so many people outside of the philosophical world, as well as in it.