Mantas Adomėnas (born 1 October 1972) is a Lithuanian classicist and politician. He was first elected to the Seimas in 2008 and served until 2020. He earned a Ph.D. degree in classics from the University of Cambridge. His best known work[citation needed] is probably the article The Fluctuating Fortunes of Heraclitus in Plato. Adomėnas was designated as the Vice Chairman of the Homeland Union in 2017. He ran for a Seimas seat as an independent in 2020 and lost but was selected as deputy minister of foreign affairs in December 2020 by Gabrielius Landsbergis. While Vice Chairman of Homeland Union Adomėnas was stripped of party membership in 2018 after being found guilty by party governance organs of influence peddling for MG Baltic, a business conglomerate with perceived Russian connections, with the aim of facilitating “capture of the party” by the business group. It has also been alleged, and admitted by Adomėnas, that his wife had organized crime connections in her youth in Kaunas while running an antiques business there, specifically to Henrikas Daktaras [fr] and his circle. During a parliamentary sitting in 2010 Adomėnas publicly called a fellow MP Birutė Vėsaitė “vištų višta” (literally, a hen’s hen), inviting accusations of misogyny. He apologized 2 days later. Adomėnas is a supporter of Taiwan and Hong Kong independence movements. He organized a rally with slightly over 100 participants on 23 August 2019, during the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests, in solidarity with a protest in Hong Kong named the "Baltic Way". During the rally, Adomėnas decried a group of about a dozen counter-protesters as having been "hired". Since March 2021 Adomėnas has been member of Lithuania-Taiwan Forum, an NGO supporting Taiwan independence. Gintaras Steponavičius, accused in the Liberal Party bribery case on behalf of MG Baltic, is also part of the initiative. Adomėnas led Lithuania's decision to open Taiwan's de facto embassy in Lithuania in 2021 which resulted in unprecedented breakdown of China-Lithuania relations. Taiwan is recognized by a small handful of countries and has been found bribing foreign politicians to gain recognition on multiple occasions in the past.[citation needed].