Paul Virilio (French: [viʁiljo]; 4 January 1932 – 10 September 2018) was a French cultural theorist, urbanist, architect and aesthetic philosopher. He is best known for his writings about technology as it has developed in relation to speed and power, with diverse references to architecture, the arts, the city and the military. Virilio was a prolific creator of neologisms, most notably his concept of "Dromology", the all-around, pervasive inscription of speed in every aspect of life. According to two biographers, Virilio was a "historian of warfare, technology and photography, a philosopher of architecture, military strategy and cinema, and a politically engaged provocative commentator on history, terrorism, mass media and human-machine relations." Paul Virilio was born in Paris in 1932 to an Italian communist father and a Catholic Breton mother. He grew up in the northern coastal French region of Brittany. The Second World War made a big impression on him as the city of Nantes fell victim to the German blitzkrieg, became a port for the German navy, and was bombarded by British and American planes. The "war was his university". After training at the École des métiers d'art, Virilio specialised in stained-glass artwork and worked alongside Henri Matisse in churches in Paris. In 1950, he converted to Christianity. After being conscripted into the army during the Algerian War, Virilio attended lectures in phenomenology by Maurice Merleau-Ponty at the Sorbonne. In 1958, Virilio conducted a phenomenological inquiry into military space and the organization of territory, particularly concerning the Atlantic Wall, the 15,000 Nazi bunkers built during the Second World War along the French coastline that were designed to repel any Allied assault. In 1963, he began to collaborate with the architect Claude Parent and formed the Architecture Principe group (among the small group of interns were the architects Francois Seigneur and Jean Nouvel). After participating in the May 1968 uprising in Paris, Virilio was nominated Professor by the students at the École Spéciale d'Architecture. In 1973, he became the director of studies. The same year, Virilio became director of the magazine L'Espace Critique. In 1975, he was one of the organizers of the Bunker Archéologie exhibition at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris, which was a collection of texts and images relating to the Atlantic Wall. He has since been widely published, translated, and anthologised.[citation needed] In 1998, Virilio began to teach intensive seminars at the European Graduate School. His final projects involved working with homeless groups in Paris and building the first Museum of the Accident. Virilio developed what he called the "war model" of the modern city and of human society in general and is the inventor of the term 'dromology', meaning the logic of speed that is the foundation of technological society. His major works include War and Cinema, Speed and Politics and The Information Bomb in which he argues, among many other things, that military projects and technologies drive history. Like some other cultural theorists, he rejects labels - including 'cultural theorist' - yet he has been linked by others with post-structuralism and postmodernism. Some people describe Virilio's work as being positioned in the realm of the 'hypermodern'.  He has repeatedly affirmed his links with phenomenology, for example, and offers humanist critiques of modernist art movements such as Futurism. Throughout his books the political and theological themes of anarchism, pacifism and Catholicism reappear as central influences to his self-proclaimed 'marginal' approach to the question of technology.  His work has been compared to that of Marshall McLuhan, Jean Baudrillard, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Jean-François Lyotard, Jacques Ellul,  and others. Virilio was also an urbanist. After having been a longtime resident of the city of Paris, he moved to La Rochelle. Virilio's predictions about 'logistics of perception' - the use of images and information in war - (in War and Cinema, 1989) were so accurate that during the Gulf War he was invited to discuss his ideas with French military officers. Virilio argued that it was a 'world war in miniature'. War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception, a 1989 book by Paul Virilio, discusses the relationship between image and war technology. Drawing on a number of films and film directors, including Sergei Eisenstein, Francis Ford Coppola, D.W. Griffith, and Stanley Kubrick, Virilio presents an postmodern analysis of how the representational methods of photography and cinema have impacted modern and historical warfare. Virilio believed that technology cannot exist without the potential for accidents. For example, Virilio argued that the invention of the locomotive also contained the invention of derailment. He saw the Accident as a rather negative growth of social positivism and scientific progress. He believed the growth of technology, namely television, separates us directly from the events of real space and real time. In it he suggested we lose wisdom and sight of our immediate horizon and resort to the indirect horizon of our dissimulated environment. From this angle, the Accident can be mentally pictured as a sort of "fractal meteorite" whose impact is prepared in the propitious darkness, a landscape of events concealing future collisions. Aristotle claimed that "there is no science of the accident", but Virilio disagreed, pointing to the growing credibility of simulators designed to escape the accident— which he argued is an industry that is born from the unholy marriage of post-WW2 science and the military-industrial complex. Virilio coined the term "dromology" (based on Dromos, an Ancient Greek noun for race or racetrack) to signify the "logic and impact of speed". Dromology is important when considering the structuring of society in relation to warfare and modern media, as the speed at which something happens may change its essential nature, and that which moves with speed quickly comes to dominate that which is slower. Hence the study of dromology "necessarily implies the study of the organisation of territory[, as whoever] controls the territory possesses it. Possession of territory is not primarily about laws and contracts, but first and foremost a matter of movement and circulation". In contemporary warfare, logistics does not just imply the movement of personnel, tanks, fuel and so on, but also the movement of images both to and from the battlefield. Virilio talked a lot about the creation of CNN and the concept of the newshound. The newshound will capture images which will then be sent to CNN, which may then be broadcast to the public. This movement of images can start a conflict (Virilio uses the example of the events following the broadcasting of the Rodney King footage). The logistics of perception relates also to the televising of military maneuvers and the images of conflict that are watched not only by people at home, but also by the military personnel involved in the conflict. The 'field of battle' also exists as a 'field of perception'. For Virilio, the transition from feudalism to capitalism was driven not primarily by the politics of wealth and production techniques but by the mechanics of war. Virilio argued that the traditional feudal fortified city disappeared because of the increasing sophistication of weapons and possibilities for warfare. For Virilio, the concept of siege warfare became rather a war of movement. In Speed and Politics, he argues that 'history progresses at the speed of its weapons systems'. In an interview conducted by Bertrand Richard, Virilio articulated his concept of an administration of fear which governs contemporary life, together with a summary of his other philosophical views.  The interview was later printed as a short book (2010) and translated into English (2012).  Virilio chose the phrase in reference to the title of Graham Greene's novel  The Ministry of Fear, a fictional account of the Blitz in London; Virilio himself had lived through the Blitzkrieg in France as a boy, a formative event which informed his philosophy. Based upon his experience as an urbanist, Virilio stresses that fear has not only a psychological aspect, but also a physical one which is closely related to speed.  To underline the point, he cites Hannah Arendt's claim in The Origins of Totalitarianism that "Terror is the realization of the law of movement", explaining that Arendt's use of the term "law of movement" refers to "the fact that there is no relationship to terror without a relationshipto life and speed. Terror cuts to the quick: it is connected to life and quickness through technology". One can see this, he notes, in the image of a gazelle running to escape a lion. For contemporary humanity, fear is also related to speed, which can be seen in scenarios such as a nuclear apocalypse or a stock market crash.  Hypotheticals like these are governed by computers, which act at speeds that are not tractable for humans.  Virilio also contends that perpetual, instantaneous communication via computers and the internet are disruptive to biological rhythms and historical seasonal patterns of life in human culture, producing both fear and misery.  As an example, he cites an increase of suicides which occurred among France Télécom employees from 2009 to 2010.  Virilio attributed the suicides to the organization's restructuring which required frequent relocation of employees and expectations of constant communication. Jean Baudrillard, while drawing on Virilio's works in 1985, eventually stated in 1988 that Virilio's analyses were out of date as "Speed is out!", stating that immobility has set in because "all trips have already taken place". A book-length criticism of Virilio's work to 2004 was written by Steve Redhead. He observed: He also notes that Virilio does not pass the grade in academic studies: However, for Law and Popular Culture, Redhead concedes Virilio as a factor: In 2014, Mark Lacy, an analyst of security, technology and global politics noted: Lacy credits Virilio with balancing the propaganda of progress against the management of fear at some cost: Virilio was one of the many cultural theorists (and other postmodernists) criticized by physicists Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont in 1997 for what they characterize as misunderstanding and misuse of science and mathematics. Virilio's works are the subject of chapter 10 of Fashionable Nonsense. Their criticism consists of a series of quotes (often long) from Virilio's works, and then explanations of how Virilio confuses basic physics concepts and abuses scientific terminology, to the point of absurdity. In the authors' words: A criticism of a passage often reads something like this: They end their chapter with a long quote followed by this comment: