Alexey Andreevich Anselm  (Russian: Алексей Андреевич Ансельм, 1 July 1934 – 24 August 1998) was a Russian theoretical physicist, Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, professor, director (1992–1994) of the  B.P. Konstantinov Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute (PNPI), member of: the Russian and American Physical Society, the executive committee of the Nuclear Physics Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, the editorial board of the Russian journal “Yadernaya Fizika”. Anselm was known for his discovery of non-universality of the Landau pole in Quantum field theory, contributions to the theory of complex angular momenta, works on the Quark model, Spontaneous symmetry breaking, mechanisms of CP violation, modifications of the Standard Model, Cosmology, and the development of a simple model for the proton spin crisis. Anselm was born into a family of physicists. His father Andrey Ivanovich Anselm [ru] (1905–1988) was a Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, professor; his mother Irina Victorovna Motchan (1903–1978) also was a Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences.  Both parents worked as research scientists at the Leningrad Institute of Semiconductors. Aleksey Anselm graduated  summa cum laude from the Leningrad State University  (LSU) in 1956 and enrolled  at  the Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute (Phystech) of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR [ru]. He joined the Nuclear and Particle theory group  of professor I. M. Shmushkevich in the Theory Department. It did not take a long time for such leading Soviet theorists as Lev Landau, Karen Ter-Martirosian and Vladimir Gribov to recognize Alexey Anselm as a talented and capable physicist. Weak and strong interactions of elementary particles became the principal field of his scientific research. In 1971 the Theory Department of Phystech was transferred to Gatchina, where it joined the B.P. Konstantinov Leningrad Nuclear Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of Science (LNPI) [ru]. All further scientific activity of A. Anselm developed in this institute.  Besides research, since 1974  A. Anselm was also a professor at the Physics Department of the Leningrad State University  where he was teaching graduate courses. In the early 1980s Anselm became a head of the LNPI Theoretical Department, and in 1992 he was elected  director of the LNPI. The years immediately after collapse of the Soviet Union were perhaps the most difficult period in the history of this renowned scientific institution. Unfailing determination by Anselm enabled the institute to survive the hard times.  In 1994 a serious illness forced Alexey Anselm to retire. He endured hard medical treatments both in St. Petersburg and in Boston (US), where his daughter had moved by that time. At the end medicine was powerless, and he died in the early fall of 1998. Anselm is buried at the town cemetery of Newton, at the outskirts of Boston, US.