Ana María Cetto Kramis (born 1946, in Mexico City) is a Mexican physicist and professor. She is known for her contributions to quantum mechanics, stochastic, electrodynamics, and biophysics of light, and for her work as a pacifist. From 2003 to 2010 she was Deputy Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). She is also professor at the Faculty of Sciences at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), of which she was also director. Cetto is responsible for several scientific literature programs in Latin America and for several international programs on the promotion and participation of women in science. She has a bachelor's degree in physics from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) and graduate degrees from both, Harvard University and the National Autonomous University of Mexico. At Harvard University, she did a master's degree in biophysics, then returning to Mexico, where she obtained her master's degree and PhD in physics at UNAM. Becoming the first woman doctorate in Mexico. She is a researcher at the Physics Institute of the UNAM, and professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the same university. She is also the daughter of the renowned Mexican architect Max Cetto. Ana María Cetto is an expert in theoretical physics, her specialty is Quantum Mechanics, Stochastic Electrodynamics and Biological Physics. She has been director of the Faculty of Sciences at UNAM (1978-1982), as well as a professor, and researcher at the same institution. She was elected president of the executive committee 2021-2022 of the Mexican Physical Society. Ana María Cetto has been involved in the management of several international organizations. In 1995, she was council member of the Pugwash Conferences, and in 2002 she was appointed as general secretary of the International Council for Science (ICSU), becoming the first Latin American appointed to the position. Cetto has also been a founding vice president of the Third World Organization for Women in Science (TWOWS). From 2003 to 2010 she was Deputy Technical Director of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). She has also been a member of the Governing Board of the United Nations University (UNU) and President of the Council of the International Foundation for Science (IFS). Cetto's trajectory has been recognized in different occasions: she was awarded as "Woman of the Year" in Mexico in 2003, and she has also received several other distinctions as a member of the Third World Academy of Science, the Mexican Academy of Science, the Mexican Physics Academy and the American Physical Society. She is also a member of the World Future Council. In 2015, the University of Guadalajara created the "Ana María Cetto Chair for the Diffusion of Scientific Culture" in recognition of her scientific work. Ana María Cetto has also participated in several international programs aimed at promoting women's participation in science. Because of her advocacy activities, she received the "Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz" distinction awarded by the UNAM. She is also responsible for scientific information programs in Latin America, and programs for the promotion and participation of women in science as well. Throughout her trajectory, she has been committed to promoting women's participation in science. Among various initiatives, she is part of the jury of the Ada Byron Award, Mexico Chapter, an award created by the University of Deusto to recognize women who work in the labor fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Ana María Cetto participated in the project focused on the creation of the Museum of Light in Mexico City. The Museum of Light is a thematic museum of the General Directorate for the Dissemination of Science of UNAM, and was inaugurated in 1996. Cetto was in charge of its renovation in 2016. She was also a promoter of the International Year of Light 2015 and belongs to the International Steering Committee of the International Day of Light. Another of her lines of work has been the dissemination of scientific content. She has directed the Mexican Journal of Physics and is the founding president of Latindex, the Regional Online Information System for Ibero-American Scientific Journals created in 1997. Ana María Cetto's work has been related to the Nobel Peace Prize on two different occasions. She was Council member of the Pugwash Conferences when the international organization received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995. The prize was granted for "their efforts to diminish the part played by nuclear arms in international politics and, in the longer run, to eliminate such arms." From 2003 to 2010 she was Deputy Director General and Head of Technical Cooperation Department of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) dedicated to the control of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The IAEA was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2005 for "their effort to prevent nuclear energy from being used for military purposes and to ensure that nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is used in the safest possible way." Apart from the awards and honors already mentioned, Ana María Cetto's work has been recognized with several other distinctions, including the following: