Andreas Mandelis (Greek: Ανδρέας Μανδέλης, born 22 June 1952) is a professor and researcher at the department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering at the University of Toronto and director of the Center for Advanced Diffusion-Wave and Photoacoustic Technologies (CADIPT). He is an internationally recognized expert in thermophotonics. His research encompasses the non-destructive evaluation of materials with industrial and biomedical applications. He is considered a pioneer in the fields of diffusion-wave, photothermal and photoacoustic sciences and related technologies. He is the inventor of a photothermal imaging radar which can detect tooth decay at an early stage. Mandelis was born in Corfu, Greece. He received his B.S. in physics from Yale University in 1974. He then pursued graduate studies at Princeton University, where he received a Ph.D. in mechanical and aerospace engineering in 1980 after completing a doctoral dissertation titled "Theory of the frequency and time domain photoacoustic spectroscopy of condensed phases." After graduating from Princeton, Mandelis worked as a researcher at Bell-Northern Research Labs in Ottawa from 1980 to 1981. He has written and co-authored over 290 papers which have appeared in peer-reviewed journals and about 160 papers in scientific and technical proceedings. He is the editor-in-chief of the book series "Progress in Photothermal and Photoacoustic Science and Technology" which is published by the Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE). He is the director of the Center for Advanced Diffusion-Wave and Photoacoustic Technologies  (CADIPT) at the University of Toronto, formerly known as Centre for Advanced Diffusion-Wave Technologies (CADIFT). He has appeared as the guest editor in special publications in the area of photoacoustic, photothermal and diffusion-wave phenomena. He is editor-in-chief of the Springer International Journal of Thermophysics. He is an associate editor for the AIP Journals Review of Scientific Instruments and  the Journal of Applied Physics. He is also a member in the editorial and advisory boards of the SPIE Journal of Biomedical Optics, the Journal of Applied Physics, Applied Physics Letters, the International Journal of NDT&E, Analytical Sciences (J. Chem. Soc. Japan) and the Journal of Diffusion Fundamentals. He is contributing editor for Physics Today of the American Institute of Physics and member of the editorial board for the Journal of Biomedical Optics of the SPIE, in the areas of photothermal imaging, dental optics, and photoacoustic tomography. Mandelis is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, a Fellow of the American Physical Society, a Fellow of the SPIE, a Fellow of the ASME, Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering,  and a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He is an internationally recognized expert in applied photonics, imaging, optoelectronics, materials science and biophotonics. He is considered a pioneer in the fields of diffusion-wave, photothermal and photoacoustic sciences and related technologies and his research is recognized as having helped define and develop these areas. He also pioneered the Thermal-Wave Resonant Cavity, which has applications in the fields of  molecular thermophysics, kinetic theory and the infrared emissivity of fluids. Mandelis has created the field of dental photonic engineering and the technique of photocarrier radiometry. Andreas Mandelis currently works as a full professor at the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering at the University of Toronto which he joined in 1981. He is also a professor at the  Electrical and Computer Engineering department and the Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering at the same university. His current research in the field of biomaterials and biomedical engineering involves establishing the fields of biophotonics and biophotoacoustics as they apply to biological tissues. Mandelis is co-founder and chief technology officer of Quantum Dental Technologies and he is the recipient of the 2012 CAP-INO Medal for Outstanding Achievement in Applied Photonics. The company's device, named the 'Canary System', uses laser pulses to detect tooth decay and is used as a non-invasive alternative to traditional methods including x-rays. The machine detects tooth demineralization at an early stage so that the damage can be repaired using remineralizing compounds and avoid the use of drills. List of selected publications: