Andrea Alù (born September 27, 1978) is an Italian American scientist and engineer, currently Einstein Professor of Physics at The City University of New York Graduate Center. He is known for his contributions to the fields of optics, photonics, plasmonics, and acoustics, most notably in the context of metamaterials and metasurfaces. He has co-authored over 650 journal papers and 35 book chapters, and he holds 11 U.S. patents. Andrea Alù received his laurea (2001), MS (2003), and PhD (2007) in electronic engineering from Roma Tre University. After a postdoctoral fellowship with Professor Nader Engheta at the University of Pennsylvania, he joined the faculty in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Texas at Austin, where he was the Temple Foundation Endowed Professor. In 2015 he was also the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) Visiting Professor at the AMOLF Institute in the Netherlands. In January 2018, he became the founding director of the Photonics Initiative at the Advanced Science Research Center (CUNY ASRC) and Einstein Professor of Physics at the CUNY Graduate Center. Alù is known for his breakthroughs in metamaterials, including his work on invisibility cloaking, or making objects transparent to incoming electromagnetic or acoustic waves. He realized the first freestanding three-dimensional invisibility cloak. He also developed the first acoustic circulator, a device that can route sound asymmetrically as a function of the propagation direction, and he has made important advances in ultrathin optical devices based on engineered materials for linear and nonlinear optics. Alù is a Fellow of the National Academy of Inventors, American Association for the Advancement of Science, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, SPIE, the American Physical Society, the Optical Society of America, and the Materials Research Society. He is a full member of URSI and a Clarivate Highly Cited Researcher since 2017. Among his several scientific awards and honors, he has been named the 2021 Blavatnik National Award Laureate in Physical Sciences and Engineering, the largest unrestricted scientific prize for America's most innovative, young, faculty-rank scientists and engineers. He also received the 2015 Alan T. Waterman Award from the National Science Foundation, the United States' highest honorary award for young scientists. Alù has been serving as the President of the Metamorphose Virtual Institute for Artificial Electromagnetic Materials and Metamaterials, as a member of the Administrative Committee of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society, as an OSA and IEEE AP-S Distinguished Lecturer. He has been a Simons Investigator in Physics since 2016 and the Director of the Simons Collaboration on Extreme Wave Phenomena since 2020. He has organized and chaired various international symposia and conferences, including several of the metamaterials conference series, and has been the technical program chair in several conferences, including the IEEE AP-S Symposium in 2016. Alù to date has authored over 650 journal articles, 950 conference papers, and 35 book chapters, which have received over 53,000 citations.