Basilis C. Xanthopoulos (also Vasilis; Greek: Βασίλης Κ. Ξανθόπουλος; 8 April 1951 – 27 November 1990) was a Greek theoretical physicist, well known in the field of general relativity for his contributions to the study of colliding plane waves. Basilis Xanthopoulos was born in Drama. He excelled in high school showing an advanced analytic abilities in physics and mathematics. He was awarded the 1st prize in the national mathematics competition, organised by the Greek mathematical society in 1969 and at the same year he was admitted with the highest grade among all students in Greece to the Department of Mathematics  of the University of Thessaloniki.  Four years later he also graduated first in his class and after scoring at the top 1% in the GRE, he was admitted  for graduate studies in Physics at the University of Chicago. He moved to Chicago in December 1974 and earned his Ph.D. on May 30, 1978, under the supervision of Prof. Robert Geroch. The title of his dissertation was "Exact vacuum solutions of Einsteins equation from linearized solutions". During this time, he commenced a close lifelong collaboration with Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, who was effectively his co-supervisor and became a close friend and life-long mentor.  Chandrasekhar, having been awarded the Nobel prize in Physics in 1983,  visited Crete several times in the mid to late 1980's to collaborate with Xanthopoulos, and actually mentions in 1991 in Current Science that "My association with Basilis is the most binding in all my sixty years of science". Upon completing his PhD Xanthopoulos moved as a visiting assistant professor at the Department of Physics of Montana State University until June 1979 and continued as a postdoctoral researcher at Syracuse University. In December 1979 he returned, as a Chief Assistant, to the Department of Physics of the University of Thessaloniki. On November 29, 1982, he moved as a faculty to the newly established Department of Physics of the University of Crete, where he advanced through the ranks becoming full professor in 1987. He served as a Chairman of department from 1987 until his murder on the evening of November 27, 1990, shot together with his colleague Stephanos Pnevmatikos while giving a seminar by a 32-year-old disgruntled mentally unstable named Giorgos Petrodaskalakis (who later committed suicide). Xanthopoulos contributed in a number of areas of mathematical physics and general theory of relativity. In particular, he worked on:  The complete list of his publications is available from NASA/ADS here, while his Google Scholar profile is available here. The appreciation on the contributions of Basilis Xanthopoulos  to science and education is reflected by a number of events in his memory: On April 8, 2021, on the occasion of the 70 years since his birth, the Department of Physics of the University of Crete and the Institute of Astrophysics of FORTH made available online his personal archive in a dedicated web page.  Media related to Vasilis K. Xanthopoulos at Wikimedia Commons