Carmelle Robert (born 1962) is a Quebec astrophysicist, starburst researcher and professor at the Department of Physics, Physical Engineering and Optics at Université Laval, in Quebec City, Quebec. Robert earned her undergraduate degree in physics from the University of Sherbrooke (1984), and her master's and a doctorate in astrophysics from, University of Montreal (1987, 1992 respectively). She also completed her postdoctoral fellowships including one with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland (1991-1994). As a graduate student, Robert investigated the wind clumps observed in the spectrum of the Cygnus Wolf-Rayet stars, using the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope. As a postdoc at the Space Telescope Science Institute, she applied this expertise on massive stars to study starburst regions in distant galaxies in the ultraviolet light. In 1995 she received a Women Faculty Award from the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada enabling her to return to Université Laval in Quebec. One of her grad students there was Laurie Rousseau-Nepton, the first indigenous woman in Quebec to obtain a Ph.D. in astrophysics. For the academic year ending April 2018, she took a leave of absence to conduct research at the University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo from September 2017 to April 2018. Robert's research includes the characterization of the different generations of stars in galaxies and uses that information to understand the mechanisms that drive the evolution of galaxies. One of her key focus areas is known as a starburst region. According to one report,  As part of her research, Robert has developed a synthesis code, which can be used to "determine the right mixture of star spectra which will reproduce as faithfully as possible the spectral signature of distant galaxies in the manner of a painter who seeks the right dosage of pigments to obtain the desired color." On the night of February 9, 1996, Robert was part of a team of four astrophysicists from Université Laval to discover a supernova now called SN1996D, which is located in the galaxy NGC 1614, 250 million light years from Earth. Working with colleagues Laurent Drissen, Yvan Dutil and Jean-René Roy, the discovery was made at the Canada-France-Hawaii Astronomical Observatory, located at the top of Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii. A paper about the event said, "SN1996D appeared suddenly following the explosion of a star whose mass would be about ten times that of the Sun." The supernova is not readily visible to the naked eye but using a quality telescope, amateur observers could expect to see it in dark skies. In 1996, Robert was credited, along with two other astrophysicists, for the discovery of a new luminous blue variable star called NGC 2363-V1, which is located in the star-forming region NGC 2363, at the far southwestern part of the irregular galaxy called NGC 2366 in the  Camelopardalis constellation, in the northern celestial hemisphere. It is almost 11 million light years away from the Earth's galaxy. Working with Laurent Drissen and Jean-René Roy, the group discovered the new star after closely examining images taken by the Hubble Space Telescope Wide Field Planetary Camera. According to WorldCat.org, Robert has 13 works in 23 publications in 2 languages as of 2020.