Claudia Felser (28 July 1962 in Aachen) is a German solid state chemist and materials scientist. She is currently a director of the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids. Felser was elected as a member into the National Academy of Engineering in 2020 for the prediction and discovery of engineered quantum materials ranging from Heusler compounds to topological insulators. Felser studied chemistry and physics at the University of Cologne, completing there both her diploma in solid state chemistry (1989) and her doctorate in physical chemistry (1994). After postdoctoral fellowships at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research in Stuttgart, Germany (1994-1995) with Arndt Simon and Ole Krogh Andersen, she moved to the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) in Nantes, France (1995-1996), where she worked in the group of Jean Rouxel. Afterwards, she joined the Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz in 1996 as an assistant professor (C1). She habilitated there in 2002 and was appointed to a full professor (C4) in 2003. In 1999, she was a visiting professor at Princeton University and, in 2000, at the University of Caen.From 2009 to 2010 she was visiting professor at Stanford University and in 2019 visiting professor at Harvard University in the department Physics/ Applied Physics. Since September 2011 she is a director of the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids and Professor hon. at the TU Dresden. Her initial research interests include Heusler compounds and related filled tetrahedral structure types, the design, synthesis and physical investigation of new quantum materials, and materials for energy technologies (solar cells, thermoelectrics, catalysis, spintronics). The physical investigations are executed on bulk material, thin films and artificial superstructures. Her current research focuses on relativistic materials science. Felser, along with collaborators, developed the field of topological quantum chemistry, which involves the design, synthesis, and realization of new multifunctional materials guided by theory. In particular, she focuses on new materials for quantum technologies such as topological insulators, Weyl and Dirac semimetals, skyrmions, superconductors, new fermions, and new quasiparticles (axions, majorana, parafermions, etc.). Three of her most-cited publications are: She is the chairwoman of a German Research Foundation research group.  She was a member of the 13th Bundesversammlung (Germany). Claudia Felser is married to the physicist Stuart S. P. Parkin. She has one daughter.