Jeffrey Robert Forshaw (born 1968) is a British particle physicist with a special interest in quantum chromodynamics (QCD): the study of the behaviour of subatomic particles, using data from the HERA particle accelerator, Tevatron particle accelerator and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. Since 2004 he has been professor of particle physics in the School of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Manchester. He is the co-author of five books, including the popular science books Why Does E=mc²?, The Quantum Universe and Universal: A guide to the cosmos, co-written with physicist Brian Cox. He has also written over 100 peer reviewed papers published in scientific journals and speaks at international science festivals for children and adults. He frequently acts as science consultant to the BBC and other media and is a columnist for The Observer. Forshaw is a recipient of the Maxwell Medal and Prize for his contribution to particle physics, and the Kelvin Prize from the Institute of Physics for his contribution to the public understanding of physics. Forshaw attended Hesketh Fletcher High School and studied A levels at Wigan and Leigh College where he considered his teachers, Jim Breithaupt, Alan Skinner and Jean Wadsworth an important influence on his future career. He went on to study physics at Oriel College, Oxford graduating with a first class Bachelor of Arts degree in physics in 1989, followed by a PhD in Theoretical Physics from the University of Manchester in 1992 for research on the parton content of the photon and photon-induced minijets. From 1992 to 1995 he worked as a postdoctoral research scientist at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory near Didcot in Oxfordshire, in the group led by noted particle physicist Frank Close.  While studying he intended to become a school teacher but began lecturing at university level after his PhD. He began his friendship and eventual collaboration with Brian Cox around 1995 when he was Cox's lecturer in Advanced Quantum Field Theory as they were the same age, despite being student and teacher. In 2004 he became professor of particle physics at the University of Manchester School of Physics and Astronomy. At Manchester he engaged in experimental and theoretical research in the field of particle physics, with particular interest in the behaviours of particles in high energy colliders as at the ATLAS experiment and Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiments, part of the Large Hadron Collider particle accelerator research at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. He said of his theoretical physics research,  He has written over 100 peer-reviewed articles in scientific journals, including papers on ordering gluon emissions, quantum field theory and holographic wavefunction of mesons. Forshaw and his frequent co-author Cox have stated the peer review process of science results publishing is important because it ensures that minimum standards are met in the scientific community and gives due attribution to all associates working on the piece who are finalising the presentation of the paper, and blogging research before it is published should be avoided. As an educator Forshaw is keen to encourage the idea that basic principles and theories in particle physics should be introduced to children in school in order to encourage understanding of the scientific method and use of evidence-based thinking at a young age. In 2008 he added his voice to the Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) campaign against spending cuts to UK physics budgets in a letter to the then Secretary of State at the Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills, John Denham, which was signed by around 350 prominent physicists from the UK theoretical particle physics community. The letter pointed out the adverse effects the cuts would have, not only to physics research in the UK, but also in discouraging future students of astronomy, particle physics and science in general. When asked whether investment in physics could potentially contribute to the UK economy he pointed out,   He also encourages people to see the relevance of quantum physics in everyday life and not purely as an academic discipline, using solar panels and lasers as examples of practical everyday applications. In his many public lectures he has been described as "deeply enthusiastic about his subject" and "entertaining and informative." Forshaw often visits schools and colleges to speak in front of young people about aspects of his work and has appeared on children's television in the UK explaining concepts such as the Higgs boson on BBC television programme Newsround for children aged six to twelve. He is an ambassador for educational charity Potential Plus UK which aims to support the emotional and learning needs of gifted and exceptional children. Forshaw also regularly contributes at SciBar events (literally science in a bar) and Café Scientifique events in the UK. He has supervised several PhD students and postdocs. Forshaw writes frequent popular science articles explaining complex concepts in physics for the press and magazine publications. He has written on subjects such as matter and antimatter, the Big Bang, the existence of the Higgs boson, quantum computers, supersymmetry, the Planck satellite, dark matter and the technology of nuclear fusion.He has also co-authored a set of physics talks with educational support materials for TED Studies entitled Physics – The Edge of Knowledge which is designed to be used online by teachers and students. It explores the relationship between the laws of nature and quantum physics from subatomic particles to the wider universe. Other popular science publications include: Forshaw was science consultant for several BBC Television series and programmes including the following: Of his writing and efforts to bring physics to the wider public he said,  In 1999 Forshaw was awarded the Maxwell Medal and Prize from the Institute of Physics for his outstanding contribution to particle physics. In 2013 Forshaw received the Kelvin Medal from the Institute of Physics for his outstanding contribution to making complex physics accessible and understandable to the public. In 2010 Cox and Forshaw's book Why Does E=mc²? was shortlisted for the Royal Society science book prize. Forshaw lives in Manchester and has two daughters. He was married to scientist and environmental campaigner Gail Bradbrook.