 solitons arising in a four-component description of electrons carrying both spin and layer-spin. These solitons carry nontrivial intertwined windings of real spin and layer degrees of freedom. Rajaraman has argued against India developing nuclear weapons long before its first nuclear test at Pokhran in 1974. However even after India and Pakistan officially started building nuclear weapons in 1998, he felt he should stay engaged with the strategic community and strive for nuclear restraint and threat reduction To this end, he educated himself more deeply on nuclear technology and policy. In this he was greatly helped by repeated visits to Princeton University’s Program on Science and Global Security, led by Frank von Hippel, a leader on nuclear arms control. Since then, through articles, television appearances and lectures at think tanks and universities in India and abroad, Rajaraman has tried to bring clarity to nuclear issues in South Asia and at the global level. His work covers nuclear weapon accidents, civil defense, India’s nuclear doctrine, minimal deterrence and anti-ballistic-missile and early warning systems. He has repeatedly urged capping of India’s nuclear arsenal based on technical and strategic grounds that a small arsenal will suffice to meet the requirements of the Indian government's stated doctrine of minimum deterrence. He has championed nuclear de-alert agreements and other confidence building measures at track II meetings with Pakistani and Chinese colleagues. He has calculated fissile material production and stocks in South Asia  and analysed the prospects for FMCT. More recently argued in favour of India’s joining the Comprehensive Test ban Treaty (CTBT). He has analysed in detail the ramifications of the US-India Nuclear Agreement Nuclear Deal and was an active participant in the contentious public debate surrounding its three-year negotiations (2005–08). Rajaraman is a founding member and past co-chair of the International Panel on Fissile Materials, of the Council of the Pugwash Conference on Science & World Affairs, and of the Asia Pacific Leadership Network for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, and a member of the Science and Security Board of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists for six years (see  ). For his work on nuclear arms control, Rajaraman received the Leo Szilard Award given by the American Physical Society in 2014. He has also written on safety, security and transparency in India’s nuclear energy program, from well before the Fukushima tragedy. To help mitigate the contentious views on nuclear energy among the Indian public, he organised and edited a book  on India’s nuclear energy program with contributors ranging from leaders of the governmental Department of Atomic Energy to anti-nuclear activists. He was a member of the Expert Committee of the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI) for developing their 2012 Nuclear Security Index. Despite the wide ranging research contributions summarised above, Rajaraman will perhaps be remembered more for his teaching. At all the universities where he has taught for over 50 years, he has been known for his teaching skills in physics, particularly of quantum theory. The same holds for the numerous mini-courses he has given at summer and winter schools in India and abroad, explaining new advances in theoretical physics research. Perhaps the most widely known examples of this were his monographs on quantum solitons. A new non-perturbative approach to quantum field theory was being developed in the 1970s by quantizing fluctuations around  exact classical (soliton) solutions, to get extended quantum particle states  with remarkable topological properties. In 1975 Rajaraman published the very first review article on these new methods in the review journal Physics Reports. Subsequently, he developed it as a book, Solitons and Instantons, published in 1982 by Elsevier North Holland. It explained in simple and coherent manner these developments as well as associated techniques of path integrals, instanton induced vacuum tunnelling, Grassman fields, and multiple gauge vacua. Since these methods have found applications in nuclear, particle and condensed matter physics,  this book has been widely used around the world by a generation of theoretical physicists. Its translation rights were bought by the Soviet Press MIR, who published it in Russian in 1985. Subsidized copies of the book were made available to most leading physics departments in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. He is the recipient of the 2014 Leo Szilard Lectureship Award from the American Physical Society for his “efforts to promote peace and nuclear security in South Asia though extensive engagements and writings”   and the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize in Physical Sciences in 1983. He was also recipient of 1989 Dr. G.P. Chatterjee Memorial Award and 1995 S.N.Bose Medal of the Indian National Science Academy.[citation needed]