Rohini Godbole is an Indian physicist and academic specializing in elementary particle physics: field theory and phenomenology. She is currently a professor at the Centre for High Energy Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. She has worked extensively on different aspects of particle phenomenology over the past three decades, in particular on exploring different aspects of the Standard Model of Particle Physics (SM) and the physics beyond it (BSM). Her work regarding hadronic structure of high-energy photons outlined a variety of ways in which to study it and has had implications for the design of next generation electron positron colliders. She is an elected fellow of all the three academies of Science of India and also the Science Academy of the Developing World (TWAS). Apart from her work in academics, Godbole is also a much sought-after communicator of science, often delivering talks to young students, scholars and scientists on everything physics. She is also an avid supporter of women pursuing careers in science and technology, and along with Ram Ramaswamy, edited the book Lilavati’s Daughters, a collection of biographical essays on women scientists from India. Rohini Godbole obtained her bachelor's degree in physics, mathematics and statistics from Sir Parshurambhau College, University of Pune, MSc from the Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, and PhD in 1979 in theoretical particle physics from the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Prof. Godbole joined Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai as a visiting fellow in 1979. She was Lecturer and Reader at the Department of Physics, University of Bombay from 1982 to 1995. She joined the Centre for High Energy Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, as Associate Professor in 1995 and has been a Professor since June 1998. Superannuating there by 31 July 2021 she will become an honorary professor. She is the author of more than 150 research papers; many of which have some of the largest citation indices in her area. Godbole has been working in the following areas- Prof. Godbole is part of the International Detector Advisory Group (IDAG)   for the International Linear Collider in the European research lab, CERN. The International Detector Advisory Group monitors the ILC detector research and development of the Research Directorate and the detector design groups. She is the Chair of the Panel for Women in Science initiative of the Indian Academy of Sciences. Along with Ram Ramaswamy, Godbole jointly edited Lilavati's Daughters, a collection of biographical essays on women scientists of India, which was published in the form of book by Indian Academy of Sciences in 2008.