Ulrike Diebold (born December 12, 1961, in Kapfenberg, Austria) is an Austrian physicist and materials scientist who is a Professor of Surface Science at TU Vienna. She is known for her groundbreaking research on the atomic scale geometry and electronic structure of metal-oxide surfaces. Ulrike Diebold was born on 12 December 1961 in Kapfenberg, Austria. She spent much of her high school years reading, skiing, and agonizing over what to major in at the university. She ultimately settled on engineering physics, an area with good job prospects that was also general enough to accommodate a variety of future directions. After completing her diploma in engineering physics (TU Vienna, 1986), she became increasingly enthusiastic about experimental physics while working on her Master's thesis, and ultimately completed a Doctor of Technology (Dr. techn.) in this area with Prof. Peter Varga (TU Vienna, 1990). Diebold's first appointment after graduation was as a post-doctoral research associate in the group of Theodore E. Madey in the Department of Physics at Rutgers University (1990-1993). It was there that she was first introduced to oxide surfaces, an area that she would later come to refer to as "the love of her scientific life".  Her first faculty appointment followed, at Tulane University, New Orleans, USA, where she was an Assistant Professor (1993–1999), Associate Professor (1999–2001), and Professor of Physics (2001–2009), and also an Adjunct Professor of Chemistry (1993–2009). During this time period, she also completed her habilitation in Experimental Physics (TU Vienna, 1998), held the Yahoo! Founder Chair in Science and Engineering (2006–2009), and was the Associate Department Chair (2002–2009).In 2005, Diebold and her group were forced to temporarily evacuate from New Orleans, which experienced massive flooding and power outages from the impact of Hurricane Katrina. They were hosted by the group of Theodore E. Madey at Rutgers University during this challenging period.In 2010 she moved to the Institute of Applied Physics at TU Wien where she is currently a Professor of Surface Science and Deputy Department Head, and retains the title of Research Professor at Tulane University. Ulrike Diebold is well known for her influential work in the fields of surface science, materials and physical chemistry, and condensed matter physics. In particular, she has contributed greatly to the understanding of atomic-scale surface structure and electronic surface structure of metal oxides. For her work, she mainly employs Ultra-high vacuum technology and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy. In 2013, Diebold was the sole recipient of Austria's highest research award across all disciplines, the Wittgenstein Award. The award, which comes with substantial unrestricted research funds, is bestowed in support of the notion that scientists should be guaranteed the greatest possible freedom and flexibility in the performance of their research. It enabled Diebold's research activities to flourish without restriction. Other honors include: Diebold has served in a number of editorial roles and on a number of advisory boards for scientific journals. These include: Ulrike Diebold holds dual citizenship of both Austria and the USA. She is married to Gerhard Piringer with whom she has two sons, Thomas (born 1996) and Niklas (born 1999).