Yuriy Reznikov (born 16 October 1953, died 8 October 2016) was a Ukrainian physicist, Head of the Department of Crystals at NASU Institute of Physics and a world-renown expert in the field of liquid crystals. He is known for his work on photoalignment, "giant" optical non-linearity of liquid crystals and nano-colloids. Yuriy Reznikov received his Master's degree in radiophysics from Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv in 1976. In 1985, he received his doctorate in physics in NASU Institute of Physics. His Ph.D. thesis was titled “The study of the optical nonlinearity of liquid crystals near their electron absorption bands”. In 1995, Yuriy has received his Doctor of Sciences degree after defending the thesis titled “Light Induced Impurities in Liquid Crystals”. Since 1995, he was a head of the Department of Crystals in NASU Institute of Physics. During 1979-1984 Yuriy Reznikov has discovered and studied “Giant” optical nonlinearity of liquid crystals caused by photo-transformation of their molecules (so called “conformational nonlinearity”). Prof. Francesco Simoni of Università Politecnica delle Marche (Ancona, Italy) wrote in his condolence for the death of Yuriy: “This nonlinearity is considered as a milestone for researches that followed and had many consequences as the ones related to effects of photo-isomerization on the liquid crystalline state carried out by several groups over the world and leading to the exciting research of photomobile materials”. The conformational nonlinearity then was applied for optical information processing and hologram recording.  After finishing the PhD thesis Yuriy has developed a method to measure the liquid crystal anchoring energy using light scattering technique. In the 1985-89 he has also studied the effect of a light-induced change of a cholesteric pitch under molecular photo-transformations.  Later on in 1989-1995 Yuriy’s significant accomplishments include the development of the photoalignment technology and control of the liquid crystal anchoring parameters by photoalignment technique. His groundbreaking work has paved the way for the development of this technology all the way to the widespread use in the LCD manufacturing since 2010. Other Yuriy's achievements in this time frame include conformational optical nonlinearity in two-phase region of liquid crystals, surface-driven reorientation effects in liquid crystal cells with photosensitive aligning layer.  Since 1995, Yuriy’s main milestones include light manipulation of nanoparticles in arrays of topological defects, developing a technique to measure ultra-large cholesteric pitch, studying orientational coupling in two-component suspensions of rod-like nanoparticles, discovering strong thermal optical nonlinearity in liquid crystalline metal nano-colloids, developing stable liquid crystal ferromagnetic nano-colloids, observation of high magnetic sensitivity of the aggregated ferromagnetic nano-colloids, surface mediated photorefraction in liquid crystals, developing rollable bistable plastic liquid crystal displays, studying diluted liquid crystal ferroelectric nano-colloids, finding surface bistability in liquid crystals sandwiched between photo-aligning surfaces.