Agnes Callard (née Gellen; born 1976) is an American philosopher and an associate professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago. Her primary areas of specialization are ancient philosophy and ethics. She is also noted for her popular writings and work on public philosophy. Callard was born on January 6, 1976, in Budapest, Hungary. Her mother was a hematologist and oncologist in the 1980s, specializing in the treatment of AIDS at the time. Her father started as a carpet salesman and retired as a steel exporter. Callard was raised in Budapest until the age of six. She and her parents later moved to Rome before settling in the New York metropolitan area. She earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Chicago, followed by a Master of Arts in classics and a PhD in philosophy from the University of California, Berkeley. She is Jewish. Callard has been a faculty member at the University of Chicago since 2008, becoming an associate professor of philosophy in 2017. She drew controversy when she crossed the picket line of Graduate Students United to work as a scab during the union's 2019 recognition strike. With L. A. Paul, Callard received the 2020 Lebowitz Prize, awarded by the American Philosophical Association and Phi Beta Kappa. She received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 2019. Callard has published in the Boston Review, The New Yorker, and The New York Times, and has written a column on public philosophy for The Point magazine. Podcasts that have hosted her include EconTalk, the Elucidations Podcast, and The Ezra Klein Show. In 2017, she created the Night Owls public debate series in Hyde Park, Chicago, featuring guests such as Tyler Cowen, Chris Blattman, Ezra Klein, Hollis Robbins; and in November 2018 participated in one with her ex-husband and colleague Ben Callard, on the philosophy of divorce. She hosts the podcast Minds Almost Meeting together with the economist Robin Hanson. Her 2022 tweet about throwing out her children's Halloween candy went viral. In 2011, Callard divorced her husband, fellow University of Chicago professor Ben Callard, and began seeing Arnold Brooks, who was a graduate student at the time. After a year of dating, they married. Agnes has two children with Callard and one with Brooks. She lives with both her current husband and her ex-husband. She was diagnosed with autism in her 30s.