Ajume Wingo is a Cameroonian political and social philosopher who is an associate professor at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Much of his work has focused on the analysis of non-liberal or corrupt democratic states with particular focus on contemporary African states. He has also published articles on African art, aesthetics, and culture, often juxtaposing these with western practices and customs. Hailing from Nso, a kingdom located in the North West Province of Cameroon, Ajume Wingo is a member of the Nso Royal Family. His title Shey Ntumfon (Emissary of the Fon (or King)) charges him with oversight of non-Nso organizations and institutions that enhance the interests of the people of Nso in Cameroon and worldwide.  Wingo received much of his early education from Christian and Muslim missionaries, and from a Bedouin teacher (whose title of Mallam Gargari translates to "invincible teacher") known for his toughness and draconian style of discipline. He later attended Cameroon College of Arts, Science and Technology (CCAST) Bambili where he studied history, economics and geography and the University of Yaounde where he studied law and economics. Upon emigrating to the United States, he obtained his bachelor's degree from the University of California Berkeley, and received his master's degree and PhD from the University of Wisconsin Madison. Wingo has been a fellow at the Institute of Race and Social Division, Boston University a visiting assistant professor at Clark University and Emerson College, and an assistant and associate professor of philosophy and senior fellow at the Center for Democracy and Development at the University of Massachusetts Boston. He was also a fellow at the Institute on Race and Social Division, Boston University and a fellow at the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute at Harvard University. He was an associate of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute at Harvard and director of the Center for Values and Social Policy at the University of Colorado at Boulder, where he also teaches classes in political and social philosophy as an associate professor.