Antoine Augustin Cournot (French pronunciation: ​[ɑ̃twan oɡystɛ̃ kuʁno]; 28 August 1801 – 31 March 1877) was a French philosopher and mathematician who also contributed to the development of economics. Antoine Augustin Cournot was born at Gray, Haute-Saône. In 1821 he entered one of the most prestigious Grandes Écoles, the École Normale Supérieure, and, according to Sandmo: Subsequently, Cournot held positions as professor of mathematics, chief examiner for undergraduate students, and rector of Dijon Academy. By the time Cournot died in 1877, he was nearly blind. Cournot was mainly a mathematician, but had some influence in economics. His theories on monopolies and duopolies are still prevalent. In 1838 the book Researches on Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth was published, in which he used the application of the formulas and symbols of mathematics in economic analysis. This book was strongly criticized and scarcely successful during Cournot's lifetime. He attempted nonetheless to rewrite it twice. It is influential in economics today.  Today many economists believe this book to be the point of departure for modern economic analysis[citation needed]. Cournot introduced the ideas of functions and probability into economic analysis[according to whom?]. He derived the first formula for the rule of supply and demand as a function of price and in fact was the first to draw supply and demand curves on a graph[according to whom?], anticipating the work of Alfred Marshall by roughly thirty years.  The Cournot duopoly model developed in his book also introduced the concept of a (pure strategy) Nash equilibrium, the reaction function and best-response dynamics. Cournot believed that economists must utilize the tools of mathematics only to establish probable limits and to express less stable facts in more absolute terms. He further held that the practical uses of mathematics in economics do not necessarily involve strict numerical precision.[citation needed] In the field of economics he is best known for his work in the field of oligopoly theory, Cournot competition, which is named after him. Cournot worked on determinism (in physics) and chance. Unlike Pierre-Simon de Laplace, who thought that nothing happens by chance, and Aristotle, who thought that randomness and causality had nothing to do which each other, Cournot united the concepts, defining randomness as theencounter of two independent causal series.This definition allows randomness even in perfectly deterministic events, and is used to generate random numbers by the combination of unrelated signals (for instance, temperature and sound).