Babette E. Babich (born 14 November 1956, in New York City) is an American philosopher who writes from a continental perspective on aesthetics, philosophy of science and technology in addition to critical and cultural theory. Including research work at the Université Catholique de Louvain (Belgium), Université François-Rabelais, Tours (France), Freie Universität Berlin and Universität Tübingen (Germany) Babich has a doctoral degree from Boston College. She taught at Denison University and Marquette University before her current position at Fordham University in New York City in addition to an honorary appointment as Visiting Professor of Theology, Religion and Philosophy, University of Winchester, England. She has also taught, as visiting professor, most recently, at the Humboldt University, Berlin as well as at the Universität Tübingen, The University at Stony Brook (both Manhattan and Long Island Campuses), Georgetown University, the School of Visual Arts in Chelsea (NYC), University of California at San Diego, and the Juilliard School. Babich writes on philosophy of technology and philosophy of science as well as philosophy of art, including philosophy of music, museum culture and poetics, film, television, and digital media, as well as life-size bronzes in antiquity (Greek sculpture), and the stylistic difference between analytic and continental philosophy. Over the years, Babich has contributed to contemporary debates in philosophy of science as well as the history of science and sociology of philosophy and has written on ecology, especially aether (she is part of Aaron Michael Smith and Jordan Kokot's multimedia art project, field|guide) and animal philosophy. She specializes in the writings of Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Hölderlin and she engages the work of Theodor Adorno, Giorgio Agamben, Günther Anders, Paul Feyerabend, Bruno Latour, Georges Bataille, Jean Baudrillard, Ludwik Fleck, Ivan Illich, Paul Virilio, Peter Sloterdijk, and Slavoj Žižek. Babich is the author of a range of studies foregrounding the role of politics in institutional philosophy, particularly the analytic-continental divide but also on the question of gender and agism. A student of Hans-Georg Gadamer and Jacques Taminiaux, she also worked with Jacob Taubes and Paul Feyerabend among others. In 1995, she founded the journal New Nietzsche Studies, echoing the title of the 1974 book, The New Nietzsche, the continentally minded collection edited by David Blair Allison (1944-2016).