Bonnie J. Mann is an American philosopher and professor of philosophy at the University of Oregon. She is known for her expertise on feminist philosophy. She is co-editor of Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy. A central claim of her work is that phenomenology, in order to be feminist, must be critical, i.e. it must depart from classical phenomenological practice. Only critical phenomenology is capable of thematizing and exploring the basic structures of the political and material world in their entanglement with systematic forms of historical injustice. After 9/11, she developed the notion of "sovereign masculinity" as a way of thematizing the link between misogyny and US nationalism. Mann was born in 1961 and grew up in a small town in Northeastern Oregon, in a large, working-class family. Her parents both grew up in ranching families, and were both military veterans. They were among the "working-poor," and Mann's views on political and economic issues were shaped by her experiences as a child. Her father worked long hours for many years in the local saw mill and the family eschewed any dependence on public assistance, though it was a struggle to meet even basic needs. Mann excelled in school and received multiple scholarships and other financial aid, which enabled her to attend college first at the University of Portland, in Portland, Oregon, and then at Portland State University, where she received her BA in 1983. At the University of Portland, she was a student leader of what was reportedly the first student protest that institution had ever seen, over the firing of a beloved philosophy professor (Arthur. R. Luther). Her activism later focused on feminist and international issues and continued until she became a faculty member at the University of Oregon in 2003. In 2002, Mann received her PhD in Philosophy from Stony Brook University, after a number of years alternating between activism and academic pursuits and a two-year period in which she studied and worked with feminist activists in Germany. She was influenced by the work of her dissertation advisor Eva Feder Kittay and the phenomenologist Edward S. Casey, another of her professors at Stony Brook. An outspoken lesbian, Mann has been in a relationship with Erin Kathleen Bucklew since 1994. The couple live on a small farm near Eugene, Oregon. Books Edited volumes Op-eds Peer-reviewed articles