Louis Dupré (April 16, 1925 – January 11, 2022) was a Belgian-American philosopher, professor at Yale University. Dupré was born in Veerle/Laakdal, Belgium, studied at the University of Louvain (KULeuven) where he graduated in 1956. His doctoral dissertation on The Starting Point of Marxist Philosophy received the University’s biennial J.M. Huyghe prize in social studies. Receiving a study grant from the Danish Government he went to Kopenhagen to do research on Kierkegaard. In 1958 he emigrated to the USA and thought modern philosophy at Georgetown University until 1973 when he was appointed T. Lawrason Riggs professor in the philosophy of religion at Yale University. In 1968 he became a fellow of the American Council of Learned Societies. In 1971 he was elected President of the American Catholic Philosophical Association and in 1972 he became President of the Hegel Society of America. In 1978 he served as a member of an international committee formed for the inspection of Italian universities organized by the International Council on the Future of the University. He received the Prijs De Standaard in 1982 for Terugkeer naar innerlijkheid, the best essay in the Dutch language in Belgium, a reworked translation of his earlier Transcendent Selfhood (1976). After becoming an American citizen he was in 1989 chosen a foreign member of the Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie van België voor Wetenschappen en Kunsten. In 1994 he became a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Dupré retired in 1998, left the USA in 2010 and took residence with his wife Edith in Kortrijk, a small town in Flanders, the Northern, Dutch speaking part of Belgium. For years Dupré worked on his magisterial trilogy on the origins and development of modernity. Passage to Modernity: an essay on the Hermeneutics of Nature and Culture (1993) was the first and best known part. It was followed by The Enlightenment and the Intellectual Foundations of Modern Culture (2004). The final part appeared as The Quest of the Absolute: Birth and Decline of European Romanticism (2013). Dupré also published several studies on the meaning and the place of religion in modern culture and highlighted the importance of religious symbols, religious interiority and mysticism. He was a guest professor at the University of Louvain (KULeuven), St. Louis University, University of California at Sancta Barbara, University College (Dublin), Istituto degli Studi Filosofici (Naples), Brigham Young University (Utah), and lectured at a number of colleges and universities in the USA and Europe. Edited and introduced