Nir Eyal (born June 1970) is a bioethicist and Henry Rutgers Professor of Bioethics and Director of the Center for Population–Level Bioethics at Rutgers University in New Jersey.  He was formerly a bioethicist in the Department of Global Health and Population of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and the Department of Global Health and Social Medicine of the Harvard Medical School.  He has long worked closely with Harvard bioethicist Daniel Wikler.  Eyal's current visibility concerns his role in studying the ethics of human challenge trials in HIV, malaria, and coronavirus vaccine development.  He has also written on 'bystander risks' during pandemics and infectious diseases and contract tracing during ebola. Eyal received his early education at Tel Aviv University and Hebrew University in Israel and the DPhil in Politics from Oxford University. He worked with Peter Singer and others during his 2004-2006 post-doctoral study at Princeton University in the NIH Department of Clinical Bioethics and the Princeton University Center for Human Values. He researched and taught from through 2019 in the Department of Global Health and Social Medicine of the Harvard Medical School and in the Department of Global Health and Population of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.  During those thirteen years, he was affiliated with Faculties of the Harvard Law School and Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences and their research centers.  In 2009–2010, he was a Faculty Fellow in a visitorship at the Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics in Cambridge. Since mid-2019, Eyal has been a faculty member within the Rutgers Department of Philosophy and Director of the Center for Population–Level Bioethics there. Eyal is married to Leah Price, Henry Rutgers Distinguished Professor of English at Rutgers University, founder and director of the Rutgers Initiative for the Book and the author of numerous books, including What We Talk About When We Talk About Books Prior to moving to Rutgers, Price was Professor of English and American Literature at Harvard University, where at the age of 31 she became one of the youngest assistant professors ever to be promoted to tenure at Harvard. They have one son and live in Princeton, New Jersey. Eyal is a member of Giving What We Can, a community of people who have pledged to give at least 10% of their income to effective charities.