Rahel Jaeggi (born July 19, 1967) is a professor of practical philosophy and social philosophy at the Humboldt University of Berlin. Her research areas are in social philosophy, political philosophy, ethics, philosophical anthropology, social ontology, and critical theory. Since February 2018 she has been the head of the Berlin campus of the newly founded International Center for Humanities and Social Change. Rahel Jaeggi is the daughter of Swiss sociologist Urs Jaeggi and Austrian psychoanalyst and author Eva Jaeggi. Prior to working as a research assistant to Prof. Dr. Axel Honneth  (1996-2001) at the Philosophical Institute of the University of Frankfurt (Chair of Social Philosophy) and at the  Institute for Social Research, Jaeggi studied at the Free University of Berlin (1990 - 1996). She completed her studies with a thesis  (Magistra Artium) on the political philosophy of Hannah Arendt. In 1999 she was a visiting scholar at the New School for Social Research, New York. She wrote her doctoral thesis on the concept of alienation (Freiheit und Indifferenz – Versuch einer Rekonstruktion des Entfremdungsbegriffs, 2002). Research and teaching positions brought her to Yale University in New Haven, the New School for Social Research in New York City, and the University of Frankfurt. She wrote her habilitation thesis  on the theme  Critique of Forms of Life at the University of Frankfurt.Since 2009 she has been the chair of practical philosophy and social philosophy at the Humboldt University of Berlin. During the academic year of 2015–2016, Jaeggi was Theodor Heuss Visiting Professor in Philosophy at The New School for Social Research in New York .  In 2017 and 2018 she co-organized (with The New School's Alice Crary) the  Kritische Theorie in Berlin Summer School (Progress, Regression, and Social Change) in Berlin, Germany. Together with Daniel Loick, Jaeggi was the main organizer of the international conference "Re-thinking Marx", which took place  from 20 to 22 May 2011 at the Humboldt-University of Berlin. During the conference 50 well-known scholars, including the philosopher Étienne Balibar, the sociologist Saskia Sassen, the political scientist Wendy Brown and the social philosopher Axel Honneth  discussed topics such as freedom, justice, exploitation and alienation. Jaeggi receives funding from the Humanities & Social Change International Foundation  (established by the businessman and politician of SPD Erck Rickmers) to conduct a research project on the Crisis of Capitalism and Democracy. In May 2018, together with Sabine Hark, Kristina Lepold  and Thomas Seibert, she hosted the international conference Emancipation, which took place at the Technical University Berlin. About Rahel Jaeggi: