Steven Shaviro (/ʃəˈvɪroʊ/) is an American academic, philosopher, and cultural critic whose areas of interest include film theory, time, science fiction, panpsychism, capitalism, affect and subjectivity. He earned a B.A. in English in 1975, M.A. in English in 1978, and a Ph.D. in English in 1981, all from Yale University. He teaches Film, Culture and English, first at the University of Washington, and is suspended at Wayne State University. His most widely read book is Doom Patrols, a "theoretical fiction" that outlines the state of postmodernism during the early 1990s, using poetic language, personal anecdotes, and creative prose. He has also written extensively about music videos as an artform. Shaviro has written a book about film theory, The Cinematic Body, which according to the preface is "about postmodernism, the politics of human bodies, constructions of masculinity, and the aesthetics of masochism." It also examines Julia Kristeva's concept of abjection and the dominance of Lacanian tropes in contemporary academic film theory. According to Shaviro, the use of psychoanalysis has mirrored the actions of a cult, with its own religious texts (essays by Freud and Lacan). Shaviro's book Connected, Or, What It Means to Live in the Network Society, appeared in 2003. A later book, Without Criteria: Kant, Whitehead, Deleuze, and Aesthetics was published in May 2009. Five years later, he wrote a book about speculative realism in philosophy, inspired by Alfred North Whitehead. In 2023 Shaviro wrote in a Facebook post, "Although I do not advocate violating federal and state criminal codes, I think it is far more admirable to kill a racist, homophobic or transphobic speaker than it is to shout them down." The president of his institution said that Shaviro was suspended with pay and the matter was referred to law enforcement. The Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, a campus free-speech organisation, objected to Shaviro's suspension and provided him with legal representation. Shaviro's attorney said that Shaviro "was not agitating for any violence" and the university's response was disproportionate.