Wolfgang Leidhold (born 12 December 1950 in Dortmund) is a German political scientist, philosopher and artist. He works as a full professor at the Faculty of Management, Economics and Social Sciences of the University of Cologne, with a focus on political thoery and the history of ideas. The scope of his work ranges from the Paleolithic to the present day. Since the 1980s he has been exploring the history of experience and its transformations. He recently published the results of his research in “The History of Experience: A Study in Experiential Turns and Cultural Dynamics from the Paleolithic to the Present Day” (New York, NY, 2023). The main focus of his artistic work is painting and drawing. His works have been exhibited in the USA and Germany. Leidhold studied social sciences, philosophy and East Asian studies at the Ruhr University Bochum. His teachers included Norbert Elias, Günter Gawlick, Jürgen Gebhardt, Leo Kofler, Eric Voegelin and Peter Weber-Schäfer. After completing his master's degree with a thesis on René Descartes (unpublished) and studying at Stanford University, CA, he received his PhD in 1982 with a thesis on "Ethics and Politics in Francis Hutcheson." From 1978 to 1989 he was an Assistant Professor at the University of Erlangen, teaching political philosophy, history of ideas and international relations. During the 80s, Leidhold focused on international relations, on security issues in particular, especially in cooperation with the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP). Funded by the Thyssen Foundation (Cologne) he initiated a project on the Pacific Island Region and international security (1986-1988). During this time, he worked as a research fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) of Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., than directed by Ray Cline. Later on he was associated with the East-West-Center and the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. Extensive research trips took him to the Pacific Island states, Australia, and New Zealand. This provided the empirical basis for his monograph "Crisis Under the Southern Cross. The Pacific Island Region and International Security”. With this thesis, Leidhold received his post-doctoral lecturing qualification in political science. From 1991 to 1992 Leidhold served as Interim Professor the Eric Voegelin Chair at the Geschwister-Scholl-Institute of the University of Munich and the Chair of International Relations at the University of Eichstätt. In 1992, he became a full professor of political science at the University of Cologne, focusing on political theory and the history of ideas. The study of the structure of experience and its historical development from the Paleolithic to the present has been his priority since then. Aside from numerous other research projects, he initiated and designed ILIAS in 1997, an open-source online learning platform that enjoys worldwide distribution. His dedication to the project was honored with the ILIAS honorary award in 2015. Currently, he is exploring the relationship between experience and ecology, as well as the development of a trans-human ecological ethos.  Parallel to his academic education, he studied painting and drawing in the class of Hans-Jürgen “Hänner” Schlieker (1924-2004) at the fine arts department of the Ruhr University Bochum (Musisches Zentrum, MZ) from 1972 to 1975. In 2010, the Chelsea Art Museum in New York City invited Leidhold to present a solo exhibition the following year entitled "Knots and Other Stories" (Mar. 04, 2011 - Apr. 02, 2011). Major galleries in the U.S. and Germany feature his work. In addition, he assists the New York based Boris Lurie Art Foundation as a consultant in promoting the Jewish artist Boris Lurie (1924-2008). He initiated and coordinated two solo exhibitions of Boris Lurie's artwork at the NS-Documentation Center in Cologne (2014) and the Jewish Museum in Berlin (2016). The plural term of experience and the criticism of the empiricism play a crucial role in Leidhold’s works. In his book “Political Philosophy” Leidhold defines experience as “conscious reference” of something that is experienced to the experiencing subject and on this basis identifies five experiential dimensions: the experience of the senses, the imagination, the self-consciousness, the religious experience and the “speculative experience” or the power to reason. Because the structure of experience is not a culture-specific but universal phenomenon, Leidhold’s understanding of experience forms the foundation for an intercultural Hermeneutic. The distinctive feature of the religious experience according to Leidhold lies in its active reference through an “absent presence” as opposed to the experiencing subject. The “absent presence”, after Leidhold, is the source that refers to the Human (“Presence”) without itself entering the horizon of the reference (“absence”). By means of the criterion whether the particular structure of religious experience becomes transparent or not Leidhold distinguishes between the non-articulated and the articulated type of religious consciousness. As examples for the first type he names the cosmological myth of the ancient Egyptians or Sumerians, as examples for the second type he mentions religions that refer back to reputable originators, such as Zarathustra, Moses, Laozi or Buddha. The transition from the non-articulated type to the articulated type Leidhold terms the noetic turn. He demonstrates this phenomenon by means of extensive material in the field of history of ideas. Counter to Wolff’s and Kant’s thesis that metaphysics are founded on the basis of pure reason, Leidhold develops empirically consolidated metaphysics. Simultaneously he carries out a radical change away from classical philosophy of being by considering time instead of being the highest concept. Leidhold distinguishes in his view of the human between the fixed biological foundation (“hominity”) and the open existence as a person (“humanity”). Due to the existence of man as a person that always stands in a communicative relation with others, the specific human type of cohabitation, according to Leidhold, is not the herd but the “ensemble”. This signifies the consciously formed, joint order, whose earliest type already occurs in the horde and develops its paradigmatic shape in the Greek polis. In his current project on the history of experience, Leidhold examines both the structure of experience and how it has evolved from the Palaeolithic to the present, as well as its effects on the dynamics of cultures and political orders. His main thesis advocates a paradigm shift: the structure of experience changes in the course of human history. This thesis runs against the general consensus that regards the architecture of experience as a universal constant. In contrast, Leidhold identifies eight transformations of experiential structure (including the discovery of imagination and contemplation, of spiritual experience and the unconscious) that have developed in different regions at different times. He shows how the particular mix of experiential structures determines both the characteristics of cultures and their respective design of political order. This "history of experience" includes both an interdisciplinary theory of experience that combines neurological, philosophical-systematic and historical aspects—as well as a detailed intercultural analysis of historical material from the Palaeolithic up to the present.