Yujin Nagasawa (born 23 June 1975) is a Japanese-born British philosopher specialising in the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of mind and applied philosophy. Nagasawa is H.G. Wood Professor of the Philosophy of Religion (formerly known as H. G. Wood Professor of Theology) at the University of Birmingham. He is also former president of the British Society for the Philosophy of Religion, and co-director of the John Hick Centre for Philosophy of Religion. He is best known for his work on the nature and existence of God and the problem of consciousness. Nagasawa was born in Tokyo, Japan. He studied philosophy and applied mathematics at Stony Brook University in the United States and received his PhD from the Australian National University (ANU) in 2004. From 2004 to 2005 he was Izaak Walton Killam Memorial Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Alberta, Canada and Research Fellow at the Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics at ANU.He started teaching at the University of Birmingham in 2006. He was awarded the Philosophical Quarterly Essay Prize in 2007, the John Templeton Award for Theological Promise by the John Templeton Foundation and the University of Heidelberg in 2008, and the Excellence in Philosophy of Religion Prize by the University of St. Thomas in 2010. In 2018 he was appointed as the editor of Religious Studies published by Cambridge University Press. He is also currently Philosophy of Religion Editor the of Cambridge Elements series and Philosophy Compass, and a member of the editorial board of the International Journal for Philosophy of Religion, the European Journal for Philosophy of Religion and Ashgate's the British Society for the Philosophy of Religion Book Series. Nagasawa's research interests include philosophy of religion (the existence of God, divine attributes, the problem of evil, science and religion), philosophy of mind (phenomenal consciousness, the mind-body problem, semantic externalism) and applied philosophy (medical ethics, the meaning of life, death and immortality).